All right, David. Last episode we are
doing in our studios before Radio City.
Oh, that's right. How do you feel? Uh,
we're about to go from like the stage of
one, very, very small audience of one to
the very, very big stage where if we
make a mistake, no one will notice.
Yeah. And we just re-record it and it's
like it never happened. We should try
that at Radio City. Just be like, "Ah,
strike that. All right, let's take that
again." Yeah. Hey, this is authentically
acquired, you guys. This is how we do
it. You're getting a look at the inside.
Probably not, though. All right, let's
do it. Let's do it. Who got the truth?
Is it you? Is it you? Is it you? Who got
the truth? Now,
is it you? Is it you? Is it you? Sit me
down. Say it straight. Another story on
the way. Who got the truth? Welcome to
the summer 2025 season of Acquired, the
podcast about great companies and the
stories and playbooks behind them. I'm
Ben Gilbert. I'm David Rosenthal. And we
are your hosts. Artificial intelligence
is the story of our time. It is
definitively the next trillion dollar
technology wave after PCs, the internet,
and mobile. And to understand AI, you
have to understand the company most
responsible for its technical foundation
and the wave that came before it,
Google. This episode begins our
multi-art Google saga. Finally, as I'm
sure many of you out there are saying
right now, Google has been the front
door to the entire internet for 25 years
now, a quarter century. But it wasn't
always this way. No, it was not. Back in
1998 when Google was founded, there were
a dozen other search engines that
already existed. And there were a
variety of different business models,
most of which were not very interesting.
Yeah. None of which were very
interesting. Yes. So today we will try
to answer the question why did Google
work and once it did how did it go from
clever technology and nice product to
the single greatest business of all
time. I'm not being facicious listeners
Google and I should say Alphabet today
generates more net income or profit than
any other US company more than Apple,
Microsoft, Exxon Mobile, JP Morgan
Chase, Berkshire Hathaway. This is a
cash gusher. It is a super high gross
margin, b in a giant market and c
according to the US government as of
today they are a monopoly in that market
with 90% market share. That is three
enormous numbers multiplied together to
create that most profitable company in
the US stat that I threw out earlier.
Well, I'm glad we don't need to get to
uh the government and all that until
much much later in our series. But yeah,
this is the creation of the most
beautiful business of all time. And
Google's market position has been
seemingly unassalable, at least until
really this year, until the AI wars
really heated up. So, of course, it was
that clean user experience that everyone
talks about with just a search box on
the homepage and the focus on the users
and the highquality fast search that
spread virally through word of mouth.
But good product is far from the only
reason that Google became dominant. So
today we'll tell the story of why while
Google was nowhere near the first search
engine, it was the last. Well, you know,
uh Microsoft may take a little issue
with that with Bing, but but only a
little issue. Little few percentage
points of issue. Few percentage points
of issue. Yeah. Well, listeners, if you
want to know every time an episode
drops, check out our email list. It is
also the only place where we will share
a hint at what our next episode will be.
Share corrections, updates, little
tidbits we learned from previous
episodes. That's acquired.fm/e.
After this episode, join the Slack to
talk about this with us and the whole
acquired community. acquired.fm/slack.
And if you want more acquired between
each episode, check out ACQ2, our
interview show where we talk with
founders and CEOs building businesses
and areas we've covered on the show. The
most recent was with Jesse Cole from the
Savannah Bananas. David, that was the
most fun I've ever had recording
basically any podcast episode. It was
bananas. It was awesome. Yes. Well,
before we dive in, we want to briefly
thank our presenting partner, JP Morgan
Payments. Yes. And as you all know, JP
Morgan is our partner for our big Radio
City show coming up on July 15th. We've
been hard at work preparing. It's going
to be an amazing night. The show is
basically sold out. I think there like
less than 100 tickets remaining right
now out of the 6,000 total. So, if you
haven't grabbed yours yet, go do it like
right now or they will all be gone. JP
Morgan will be showing off all their
latest and greatest payments tech there.
We'll have exclusive merch, a fan meetup
before the show, an afterparty, and an
encore event the next day at the New
York Stock Exchange. So, details on all
of that are in the acquired Slack. We're
so pumped. Yes, we cannot wait to see
you there. So, with that, this show is
not investment advice. David and I may
have investments in the companies we
discuss and this show is forformational
and entertainment purposes only. David
Rosenthal, when is the first time any
human being searched for anything ever?
Uh, I have no idea. That's a great
question. Not that far back. Where do we
start? Yeah. Well, you know what? We
should ask Google. But to do that, we
need to tell the story of Google. And
that story starts in March of 1973 in
Lancing, Michigan, where Larry Paige is
born as the second child and second son
to Carl and Gloria Page. And Larry, of
course, grows up in Lancing because his
dad, Carl Paige, Senior, is a professor
of computer science in nearby East
Lancing at Michigan State University.
Now, before my dad, who went to MSU and
is an MSU alum, gets too excited here, I
regret to inform him, my dad, and you,
Ben, that Carl got his PhD from
Michigan. I'm sorry about that. And, uh,
would send his son there as well. Yeah.
Yeah. Both of his sons. And
unfortunately, Larry's mom also went to
Michigan, also got a CS degree there,
and also teaches programming as a
programming instructor at MSU. Yeah,
pretty Michigan heavy. pretty Michigan
heavy, but uh pretty amazing childhood
in, you know, the early mid70s here for
Larry and his older brother. I mean,
maybe not unique. I'm sure there were a
few other households in America, in the
world that grew up with both of their
parents steeped in computers as computer
science professors, but really pretty
unique. Incredibly unique. Are you
kidding me? Larry Paige grew up with two
computer science academics as parents in
the 70s which would have meant that his
parents would have needed to start in
the ' 50s. Very very few households like
right at the same time as the PC era is
coming online and Microsoft and to just
have that be your air your daily
existence growing up as a kid like how
incredible is that amazing. So even more
so for future Google to come for the
1979 to 1980 academic year when Larry is
six and seven years old. His dad does a
sbatical year at Stanford. So the whole
family goes out and lives in PaloAlto
and Stamford and early Silicon Valley
there makes a big impression on young
Larry. And then he continues to kind of
be influenced by this because I
mentioned his older brother Carl Jr.
who's 9 years older than him. Carl goes
to Michigan, majors in CS just like
Larry would, and then when he graduates,
he goes out to the West Coast, actually,
to the Pacific Northwest, and he works
fairly early at Microsoft and then
Mentor Graphics down in Oregon. Carl Jr.
would ultimately also come down to
Silicon Valley and uh play a little role
in this story as we will see in a little
bit. But back to Larry here. Part of the
reason I say all this, and I want to
include Sergey too in what I'm about to
say, even though we haven't introduced
him yet in the story, I think there's
this perception today that Larry and
Sergey were these like bumbling academic
guys who weren't really businessminded
and Google was a research project and
this all sort of happened by accident
that they built the best business of all
time. Like, absolutely freaking not. We
want to dispel that notion right now.
You know, one of the things we heard
over and over again talking to people in
research is how hugely ambitious the two
of them were, not just for the products
they were building, but for Google, for
the business. Larry's a different
generation and a very different
personality than Mark Zuckerberg, but
you should think about his ambition and
his desire to build a huge world
changing company at the same level as
him. Yes. To your point, Google did not
happen by accident. Or another
reasonable comparison, the generation
before Bill Gates. I think they publicly
Larry and Sergey don't get the same sort
of ethos that those two get, but the
same fire was there. Larry would say
later, this is a quote from him,
probably when I was 12, I knew I was
going to start a company eventually. I
wanted to make the world better, and in
order to do that, you need to do more
than just invent things. And he would
say another time later, you need to use
business and entrepreneurship to make
these things real. It's not enough just
to invent them. Yeah. And he's alluding
to two things there. One is companies
are the vehicles by which you bring
ideas to the masses. And two is in a
capitalist society, a company is the
vehicle that can accumulate profits,
which then you can reinvest to build
something of your great scale and
ambition. Yes. And Larry got this all
along and Sergey did too. Okay. Okay, so
as we all know, Larry goes to Michigan
undergrad. He graduates in 1995 and then
he goes off to Stanford to get his PhD
in computer science where has a fateful
meeting with his business partner,
friend, soulmate, Sergey Britain. And
isn't the way this all went down that
Larry was visiting and Sergey was
already in the program? I think Sergey
was leading some kind of tour to try to
sell Larry on joining the program. And
Larry is, even though he's like the new
guy there, he's like challenging Sergey
at every little corner. He's bringing
up, "Wouldn't a better system be this?"
And they're talking about cities and
transportation and civic design. And
they're almost sort of like bickering
back and forth in this verbal sparring
of who's smarter even though they just
met. That's sort of like the story that
I read and I don't know what did you and
I read probably six or seven books
between us on the history of Google.
Yeah. Many, many versions of this story
out there. As I was doing the research,
I talked to one of our good friends,
Anna Patterson, who was been in the
Google orbit for a very long time. She
was an early employee, left, started a
company, Google, reacquired, was a VP of
engineering there for a long time. She
told me another little bit of this story
that has never, I think, before been
told publicly. Who? Well, it turns out
Anna was a posttock at Stanford at this
time and she's the one who organized
this new student's weekend. So she
organized Larry and Sergey meeting and
she told me that the first night of the
weekend, so like the first event, the
first time that they actually met was at
drinks at the British Bankers Club in
Menllo Park and this sort of magical
friendship, bickering back and forth,
but you know, real partnership was
started there and it was already going
that night. So Larry and Sergey, they
end up shutting the bar down that night
and another famous local Stamford alum
picks up the tab for the group.
Can you guess who that person was?
Uh, I don't know. Lay it on me. Charles
Schwab. No way. Yep. Apparently lived
locally in the area, went to the British
Bankers Club all the time, and he'd do
this. He'd just see Stanford students
there and be like, "All right, I got you
guys." That's awesome. So Charles Schwab
funded the first date of Larry and
Sergey. Yeah. Amazing. And Charles
Schwab accounts would go on to hold
billions and billions and billions of
dollars worth of Google stock because of
that.
amazing. But yes, I think the spirit of
all these stories is true. It was a
instant electric friendship partnership
between the two of them and that would
carry on forever. I mean, they shared an
office at Google. I don't think we've
really covered founders before that were
true partners in the way that Larry and
Sergey are. Like, you know, reminds me a
little bit of you and me on a very
different scale. Yes. On a very
different scale. But that's interesting.
Equal co-founders. I'm racking my brain.
Maybe Bill Gates and Paul Allen, but
even then it became very clear very
quickly Bill Gates is the guy. Yeah,
that was reflected in their equity
ownership. Exactly. I'm sure we've
covered other companies where there were
equal equity ownership amongst founders,
but where it was a real true
partnership. One plus one equaled like a
hundred. It's fascinating. Yeah, maybe
Jensen, Curtis, and Chris and Nvidia,
but over time, you know, it kind of
became Jensen. Yeah, you're right. This
is sort of unique for us to be covering
true founder partners that made it
decades together. I mean, even Warren
and Charlie, Charlie was never full-time
at Berkshire Hathaway, right? And
certainly owned way less. The closest I
can think of is maybe Capital Cities
with Tom Murphy and Dan Burke. H, it's
really interesting. Okay, so Sergey,
what's his story? Sergey was also born
in 1973 uh a few months later in August
in some place even colder than Michigan
Moscow which of course then was part of
the Soviet Union and Sergey's family was
Jewish. Soviet Union was not exactly a
great time and place to be Jewish or you
know probably to really be anything
there. His family lived in a three- room
apartment in Moscow in what I assume was
state allocated housing. They shared it
with his paternal grandmother, but his
dad was a extremely talented
mathematician. And so when Sergey is
four years old, his dad attends an
international mathematics conference.
This is like 1977, 1978, and realizes,
oh, I got to get my family to the west.
We got to get out of here. So it takes
him two years to be able to immigrate
out of the Soviet Union, but they
eventually come to the US. His dad
becomes a math professor at the
University of Maryland. His mom becomes
a researcher at NASA's Gddard Space
Flight Center. Okay. So, Larry's parents
are both computer science professors.
Sergey's dad is a math professor and his
mom works for NASA. Yes.
The pool is small of people with
backgrounds like that in the 80s. Yes.
As you would imagine, Sergey is very
precocious. He graduates high school at
age 16, goes to the University of
Maryland, gets his undergrad degree in
both math and computer science in three
years, graduates at age 19, and then of
course gets into Stanford for his PhD.
Do you know what he did in the summer
before coming to Stanford? Oo, I have no
idea. He interned at Wolfrram Research.
No way. Really? Stephen Wolfrram. Oh,
shout out to friend of the show,
Stephen. I know. I know. developers of
Mathematica that well from Alpha I guess
eventually another search engine. So
yes, Sergey every bit Larry's
intellectual equal, every bit his
sparring partner and maybe a little more
zany too. More of a love for
rollerblading than Larry, let's put it
that way. Yes. And frankly, it kind of
pencils now that you're starting to get
the picture of these two over time. You
know, in the far future, closer to
today, Sergey is the one doing stuff
like Google Glass and skydiving videos.
The zany parts of Google are sort of
Sergey's DNA and the really honed
products and products that make the
business work are a little bit more
Larry's DNA. But to be honest, there's
incredible overlap everywhere between
the two of them. Yeah. Okay. So, fall of
1995, Larry arrives at Stanford.
Sergey's already there. Terry Winterrad
is his PhD adviser and Larry and Sergey
are already building this great
friendship. Larry that academic year
presents a dissertation topic to Terry
to his adviser in collaboration with
Sergey. And the idea they have is this
worldwide web thing seems to be becoming
a thing. You know, here we're 1995.
We're what, a year after Netscape was
started, a couple years after Mosaic. I
have a stat for you on this era in the
internet. Oh yeah, light on me. This is
from John Battel's book, The Search,
which is excellent. From 1993 to 1996,
the web grew from 130 sites to more than
600,000.
And if you compute that rate of growth
over that 4-year period, it is 723%
growth year-over-year for four years.
That is exponential. Yeah, this is the
version of the Jeff Bezos realization
where he's like, I got to leave Dean and
I got to build Amazon. Like nothing like
this has ever happened before, right?
The internet is a phenomenon like no
other. And if it keeps going, I mean,
it's amazing for something to grow 700%
year-over-year at all, but it happens.
But for that to keep happening year over
year over year for half a decade, that
is worth quitting your job, dropping
everything, changing your whole life.
Yep. And just a couple years before, two
other PhD students at Stanford had
started this thing called Yahoo. And so
I think perhaps inspired by what Yahoo
was doing, Larry proposes that they're
gonna work on this idea of a system that
will allow people to make annotations
and notes directly on websites instead
of in a centralized directory like Yahoo
because Yahoo was human handcurated
commentary, you know, directory of
websites. And so the idea is like, oh,
this could be a decentralized
annotation system where anybody can say
what's interesting about a website. Oh,
that's funny. I thought I knew the whole
history of Google. I somehow missed
this. So Terry, Larry's adviser, is
like, "Okay, you know, I like the uh
problem space, shall we say, of the web
for, you know, your dissertation here,
Larry, but why don't you go refine this
idea a little more and come back to me?"
So Larry goes off and of course he's
collaborating with Sergey on this and as
they think about it they realize that uh
actually there's sort of a fundamental
flaw in what they were planning for this
annotation system which is that for a
big site like say the New York Times or
something it's just going to get overrun
with hundreds thousands millions of
users commenting and you need a way to
separate the wheat from the chaff so to
speak of the comments. You need to be
able to have the good ones rise to the
top. You need a a way to rank them, you
might say. And so Larry has a quote
here. It wasn't that we intended to
build a search engine. We built a
ranking system to deal with annotations.
We wanted to annotate the web. Build a
system so that after you'd viewed a
page, you could click and see what smart
comments other people had about it. But
how do you decide who gets to annotate a
big site like Yahoo? We needed to figure
out how to choose which annotations
people should look at, which meant we
needed to figure out which other sites
contained comments that we should
classify as authoritative.
Hence, page rank. Ah, yes, we should say
page. It is ironic that the things that
were being ranked were web pages cuz the
actual page and page rank is named for a
Larry page, not for the pages they would
rank. Right. Exactly. So, uh, Larry goes
back to Terry and he's like, "Okay, this
ranking idea, this seems like a really
interesting computer science problem.
The annotation thing seems messy. Why
don't you just focus on rankings?" So,
Larry goes back and ultimately has the
breakthrough leap. Oh, we should apply
rankings to web pages themselves. Larry
says, "Wow, the big problem here is not
annotation. We should use it not for
ranking annotations but for ranking
searches. Ding ding ding ding ding. And
thus at least the germ of the idea for
page rank as we all know it today is
born. So essentially just the mechanics
of what the idea is is try to rank
websites based on how authoritative they
are based on how credible they are. And
this is something that has been done
somewhere before the web very close to
home for all these Stanford folks.
Academia of course. Yes. How important
is a research paper? Well, that depends
how many other people cited the research
paper. And in particular, not just how
many raw number of other papers cite a
research paper. How many important
papers site your research paper? If
you're in an important journal, what do
those papers site? And this becomes the
inspiration for how they're going to do
the ranking of web pages. And this was
actually a research field before the
web, the study of academic citations.
There's already sort of a body of work
around how to do this. Well, oh,
interesting. I didn't know that
actually. I mean, it makes sense. It's
kind of like how Hollywood loves making
movies about Hollywood. Academia loves
doing papers about papers. Yeah. So
there are some examples to look at of
how might one use references or
citations to weight importance. Right?
So we're almost all the way there to the
huge leap that would become page rank
and then back rub and ultimately Google.
But there's still one missing piece.
They've got the theory of how to do
this. But what's a citation on the web?
Well, they realize it's a link. A
hyperlink is the exact same model as an
academic citation. And not only is it
the same as a citation, it's even better
because there's this metadata embedded
within the link, which is the anchor
text. Anytime you click a link, you
know, anybody who's creating a link can
make anchor text for it or if you're
like uh write whatever they want and
then just today command K on your
keyboard and then you can make that text
into a link. Well, that's pretty easy to
identify as metadata on an HTML page.
And so you get not only a citation of
the link, but a few words of what the
author of that link thought about it.
Yes. When someone is linking to you,
they often do a better job of describing
your website than you do on the page
yourself. Anybody that's just sort of
looking at your website to try to figure
out what's this about, the actual words
on your website tend not to do as good a
job as everyone who links to you in
aggregate. What words did they use to
describe your website? So, this whole
thing is a genius idea and we're going
to talk about all the work that they had
to do to implement it. It basically
works right away. The notion of hey,
what is the output if we try to create a
system that ranks all websites for
authoritiveness based on how many other
reputable websites are linking to it and
then later on we can use the anchor
text. But right now, just this ranking
system, it spits out a list that's
sorted exactly as you would hope. It is
the most authoritative websites first
and all the crap all the way at the
bottom. Yep. So Terry's like, "Yeah, do
this for your dissertation." Like,
"Great. Let's do this project."
Reputation on the web. That's going to
be valuable. So there's one more thing
to making this brilliant page rank idea
work, which is a little problem, which
is that the way the web is architected.
Any given web page only shows outgoing
links. There's no way to query a page
and say, "Oh, who links to me?" You can
only query a page and say who do you
link to? Right. It's kind of like it's
easy for me to answer the question who's
in my phone book in my phone today. It's
hard for me to answer the question whose
phone books am I in? Exactly. And so the
only way you could figure that out is if
you somehow went and got a copy of
everybody's phone book, right? And then
could back trace all the links. Well,
that's what they do. Google could not
have been built at any other time in
history. Yes. Because the web was
actually small enough that you could go
suck it all up then. Exactly. It was
small enough that as a research project,
it was not totally insane. Just a little
bit insane. It's still pretty insane to
say, "Oh, I'm going to go crawl the
entire internet, make a copy of every
web page out there, store it in
something, which we'll get to,
and then trace back all the links, and
then reverse compute all the links to
answer that one seemingly simple
question of what web pages link to me."
If you had tried to undertake this as a
brand new project, even just a year or a
couple years later, it would have been
impossible because the web would have
already gotten so big that to just start
denovo and create a index copy like
this, like a full copy even one year
later would have been tens of millions
of dollars and within a couple years
would have been hundreds of millions of
dollars. Yeah. Prohibitively expensive.
So, we're in what? 96 97 here. Yep.
We're in 96, kind of the back half of
that first academic year of Larry at
Stanford. Great. So, with Terry's
encouraging Larry and Sergey go forth to
undertake this ambitious project, they
set up a page on the Stamford internet.
They decide that they're going to call
the project back since it uses back
links for ranking web pages. So, they
spin up back.stanford stanford.edu
and Larry writes the first
implementation of page rank and the
crawler to go do this. He writes it in
Java and it's like super buggy and
basically doesn't work. So they ask one
of their friends there at Stanford, guy
named Scott Hassan to help them. He
Scott's a better coder than Larry and
Sergey is. So he codes it up in Python
and it actually sort of works. Now,
Scott, not an employee of Google, never
would become an employee of Google
because it's not a company yet. It's a
research project, right? And they hadn't
even come up with the name Google. I
mean, nothing about this. It's not a
search engine. Exactly. So, if you go to
that project homepage and you can find
cached versions of this on the internet
or images. I think there's even a
recreation of it out there. Yes. With
the really weird black and white picture
of a back rub with the red text over it.
Yeah. I think that picture actually was
on back rub.stanford.edu. edu. It looks
like somebody's back. They certainly
didn't search Google images for it. I
know that. Yeah. Exactly. Exactly. So,
the text on the page says, "Back rub is
a quote unquote web crawler which is
designed to traverse the web. Currently,
we are developing techniques to improve
web search engines." So, yeah, Ben,
they're not thinking of Back Rub as a
search engine yet. They're thinking of
back rub as just a implementation of a
crawler and the page rank algorithm. Oh,
that's interesting. But they have the
insight that this method of ranking, if
it turns out to be better, could
contribute to better search engines.
Yep. Because again, even though Larry
really wants to start a company, he's
thinking he's going to get his PhD and
then go forth here. Kind of like Mark
Zuckerberg got years into Facebook
before realizing, oh, this is my
company. So Larry and Sergey are
building Back Rub here. And I mentioned
Scott Hassan, their friend who helps
code it up in Python, doesn't end up
joining Google. Well, what happened to
Scott? Scott leaves while all this is
going on and starts a company because
it's 1996, 1997. You're here in Silicon
Valley, right? The bubble is inflating.
Like, what do you do? You go start a
company. It's your obligation to go take
a smash this piñata. So, Scott leaves,
starts a company called egroups. That
company a couple years later ends up
getting acquired by Yahoo, becomes Yahoo
Groups for about $400 million.
Do you know who co-founded egroups with
Scott? Man, you're stumping me today.
No. Larry's older brother, Carl Paige.
Oh, that's this company. Yes. Wow. So,
here we are. We've got Larry and Sergey
doing this research project to improve
search engines. Meanwhile, their buddy
who helped code that and Larry's older
brother, they just went and they started
a company and then they raised money.
Sequoa and Mike Merittz would end up
funding egroups and then they sell it
for $400 million to the leading web
company at the time. That seems like a
good idea. Yeah. Larry and Sergey start
thinking, "Ooh, wait, maybe we should do
something commercial around this. This
seems like it would have value."
So that leads them in the spring of 1997
before school is out to start shopping
this back rub technology around to the
other existing search engines at the
time. They're not yet thinking that this
could be a company. They're thinking
we're going to sell this technology to
another search engine. They're going to
pay us a lot of money for it. We'll go
come help implement it and then we'll go
back and finish our PhDs. because they
effectively have it working at this
point even though it's not you know
hardened. They have a crawler that has
run on a small number of websites. They
have a very modest index that has been
created. It's not all efficient and
everything but they sort of have the
proof of hey look this ranking is
actually a good ranking of how
authoritative these websites are. But
other than some demo proof of concepts,
they haven't yet built the consumer
version of, hey, you can go query this
thing and anybody can use it, right? So
they're shopping it around that spring,
that summer. They get a bunch of
meetings. They meet with infosek, lyos,
all the existing search engines. And we
should say there was a large list of
other search engines, portals, internet
properties, search engine like things.
Yes. That existed. It had traffic. I
mean Archie, Gopher, Alta Vista, Hotbot,
Inktoy, Los, Yahoo, Excite, Infosek. The
list goes on and on and on. Yes. So the
closest they get that spring and summer
is with Excite. The story is amazing. So
supposedly this is according to In the
Plex, Steven Levy's book, great book
that we used as a source for the
episode. They end up getting a meeting
with Venode Kosla, a legendary founder
of Sun Micro Systemystems. By this point
in time, he's one of the top VCs in the
valley. He's at Kleiner Perkins
alongside John Door. The two of them are
running the firm and Venode is on the
board of Excite. And so somehow Larry
and Sergey and I think they bring Scott
along get a meeting with Venode and they
hammer out a deal that Excite is going
to license this back rub search
technology from the two of them for
about a million dollars. Part of that's
in cash, part of that's in Excite stock.
and Larry and Sergey are going to come
work get excite that summer implement
back rub for their search, you know,
basically make excite into Google and
then they're going to leave and they're
going to go back to Stanford in the
fall. And they get so far that they run
a test, a sideby-side test of Excites
search results, the original, you know,
algorithm and then the back rub
algorithm. And the legend goes that
they're demoing this test to excite CEO
as like a final step to finalizing this
deal. And the results are so relevant
with back rub. You know, you get exactly
what you search for, exactly what you
want. It's right there. You click, you
go to it. And the usual excite search is
bad. You have to like click around, you
go forward, you come back. You spend a
lot of time on the site. And the CEO is
like, "Why on earth would we move to
your algorithm? I want people to stay on
my site. I make money when people stay
on my site. I don't want them to leave
my site. You guys are crazy. Get out of
here. I'm killing the whole deal." It is
amazing that as early as 19967,
this time period, this very important
conflict of interests is teased out.
This is basically why Google beat Yahoo.
I mean, there's a lot more to it, but
the portals all had this mentality of we
want to build more and more and keep
people on our site in our ecosystem,
continue to look at our banner ads. And
Google from this point, basically
forever, was how quickly can we deliver
someone something relevant so they can
leave Google and have had a good
experience finding what they really
wanted. Now all this is laughable in
hindsight but made total sense at the
time because what was the business
paradigm for all these sites? What was
the model? It was banner ads. It was CPM
cost per thousand views. You wanted page
views and impressions on your site. And
here what Backrub is doing is they're
going to kneecap your page views, right?
They're going to dramatically reduce the
number of page views and allocate them
to other properties on the web so they
can leave your property. This deal was
never going to happen with Excite or
anybody else because it broke the
business model, right? It was not
strategic for them. It was a conflict of
interest to implement this type of
better ranking, better search, faster
technology. So, back to the lab, right?
No deal. Yeah, exactly. That fall, 1997,
Larry and Sergey go back to school. All
these get-richqu deals have fallen
apart. Nobody wants back rub. And
Larry's just like, "Well, f it. All
right. This is how I believe search
should work. We're going to build this
thing ourselves here at Stanford." Quote
from him. We couldn't get anyone
interested in buying back rub. We did
get offers, but they weren't for much
money. So, we said whatever. We went
back to Stanford to work on it some
more. These companies weren't going to
focus on search. They were becoming
portals, i.e. they wanted eyeballs, page
views. They didn't understand search and
they weren't technology people. Yeah.
And I mean when he says we talked to
others, they tried to sell page rank to
Yahoo for $1 million and were rejected.
And there's going to be chapters of this
story that you can mark by the different
times that Yahoo discussed buying Google
and didn't. But this is the very first.
They showed the tech to Infosek. Also
didn't happen. Infosek was bought by
Disney and later shut down. They showed
the tech to LOS. They were shopping it
all around town. So they get back to
campus. They're like, "All right, we're
going to build a real search engine
ourselves. First order of business, the
name
back rub. Uh,
you're probably not going to fly." Yeah.
Describes the technical underpinnings,
but doesn't really describe the
searching. Yeah. So, they're casting
about trying to find the right name to
encapsulate what they're doing. This
sort of new good form of search. And the
story is that Larry's dormate suggests
the term Google. Oh, wait. Do you know
the name before this? Oh no. Do I know
something you don't? Oh, this is great.
Oh, go for it. The name is what box?
What box? What box? It rolls right off
the tongue. You know, it's a box that
you type stuff into. Sort of a question.
I got it. But they decided that it
sounded too close to a porn site, so
they decided not to go with it. Well,
hey, I guess if Facebook can be a
product name and a company. Yeah, maybe
we could all be what boxing things. I
mean, we are all WhatsAppapping, so to
be fair. Yeah, it wasn't that crazy. It
wasn't that crazy. But yes, what box out
next name? How did Google come about?
Larry's dorm mate suggests that they
might want to use the term Google G O L
which is the mathematical term for one
followed by 100 zeros 10 to the 100th
power. Yes. And the legend is that Larry
loves the name. Sergey likes it. They go
to register the domain name and Larry
misspells it and thought that Google was
spelled G O O G L E. misspells. Really?
I thought go.com
was taken. Oh, maybe that's it. Maybe
that's it. Like anything here, you know,
there's a lot of legends floating
around. Yes. But the misspelling is
actually great because you kind of
should spell it the way that other
people are most likely to spell it.
Right. Exactly. So, this is before uh
you've got the Google did you mean in
the search box. Yeah. Yes. Spelling was
important. So Sergey designs the
homepage and makes the first logo using
the open source drawing program
You ever use back in the day? Oh,
and you can tell it is drawn using
A lot of people probably can think of
the earliest Google logo you've ever
seen. Even the real nerds out there are
like, "Oh, yeah, I know about that one
that was real colorful before the drop
shadow thing." There's even one before
that that's like completely illeible,
and this is the the one that we're
talking about. But it was rainbow
colored. Yes, it was. We'll link to it
in the show notes and on social media.
It's fun to look at. Yep. But basically
that homepage design of a colorful logo
and a search box that was it then that's
it today 97 onward. So that 97 98
academic year is when they're building
back rub into Google by spring quarter
of that year Google.com
is doing 10,000 queries a day. This has
started to spread virally first on the
Stanford campus and then to other
academic universities and communities
out there. get wind of what they're
doing and then it starts spreading into
Silicon Valley and it's like bringing
the Stanford network to its knees with
all the traffic that is happening on
google.com out of Stanford. So at one
point they actually did bring down the
Stanford network. This is how fast it
all happened. It's all during this
academic calendar where they're taking
back rub they're working in a search
box. So there's now a keyword that we're
ranking things for, not just arbitrarily
ranking them. That keyword relies
heavily on the anchor text description.
So there's sort of these two early key
innovations. There's waiting results
based on backlinks and there's
description from anchor text. And it
really did just kind of work. The
technical underpinnings are extremely
difficult. They're having to do things
like steal computers from other research
projects. Do you know about the loading
dock stuff, David? Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
There's these famous stories of other
researchers that have ordered computers,
but they actually aren't going to start
the project for a few months. So Larry
and Sergey would go grab them off the
loading dock, spin them up, use them for
Google just for a few months until they
need to go and hand them over for the
other research projects. David, to your
point, they bring down the Stanford
network because there's so much traffic.
There's so much demand for something
that is just clearly a better way of
ranking websites than what everybody
else was doing. you know, everyone else
is basically just using keywords on
pages and saying, "Well, what pages
exist out there with the word dog?" And
if they have a whole bunch of instances
of dog, then that's going to be the top
of your results for dog, no matter how
authoritative they are. And so,
obviously, that's a problem. So, this is
just a better way to do search. And
they're really starting to soop up
Stanford's network bandwidth. At one
point they're using about half the
bandwidth of the entire university to be
serving out google.com pages. And David,
to your point, it's not a heavy website.
I mean, it's a white page with an image,
a search box, and then when you go to
the results page, there's no images. And
so, if they're consuming an incredible
amount of bandwidth for something that's
so asset light, people are using the
crap out of this thing. Yep. So, here we
are, end of the 1998 academic year. It's
clear this is going to be a company.
This has to be a company. Stanford's
about to tip over if it stays as a
project anymore. Stanford has been very
kind to say we're going to keep housing
all the infrastructure for this thing,
but at some point this needs to be a
company so that you can get it off of
our network and fund it on your own. And
nobody should shed a tear for Stanford
here because as part of the tech
transfer to spin it out of the
university, they end up getting like 1%
of the company or something like that.
Stanford did very very well for their
large S here. Yes. So Larry and Sergey
go to a professor in the CS department
at Stanford named Dave Sheridan. And
Dave had started an Ethernet company
called Granite Systems with Andy
Bealshime from Sun while also staying as
a professor at Stanford at the same
time. He was a founder of Granite
Systems and had stayed as a professor.
Cisco had just acquired Granite for 220
million. And so Larry and Sergey are
like, "Oh, okay. Dave, he's one of our
professors. He knows how to do this
stuff." And he's like, "Well, why don't
you talk to Andy about how we could spin
this out and make it into a company?" So
Dave emails Andy that evening. Andy
replies right away. He's like, "Sure,
I'm kind of busy tomorrow, but how about
we meet at your house at 8 a.m. in the
morning? I'll come by on my way to the
office." And thus begins the story of
Google's legendary
seed financing round and the crazy cast
of characters involved in it. But before
we tell that story, now is a great time
to talk about our presenting partner JP
Morgan Payments. So listeners, you've
heard us talk about specific aspects
over the last few episodes like
biometric payments, their developer
platform, and their supply chain
financing. But today we wanted to pop up
a level and tell you about the acquired
and JP Morgan partnership itself. Well,
first is the team. The folks there at JP
Morgan are a absolutely world class and
b really get acquired and what makes
this community special. Just look at the
Chase Center show we did. They took our
vision and said, "What if we did all
this times 10?" And now we're about to
go do it all over again at Radio City.
And deeper than that, they're just an
insanely trusted brand. JP Morgan
Payments is the world's largest payment
franchise. They power 18 of the top 20
corporations in the world and most
companies we've covered on the show. In
fact, over 90% of the Fortune 500
companies do business with them. A
couple years ago, we were worried that,
oh, JP Morgan Payments might only be for
big companies, but it's not. We've seen
startups that heard about them when
acquired become customers. And that's
our goal in picking partners is to find
the very best companies that create
value for listeners and will scale with
your success and be around forever. That
is JP Morgan Payments. They literally do
$10 trillion in payment volume a day.
Think about how insane that is. And with
JP Morgan processing over 50% of all US
e-commerce transactions, their software
and payment rails basically underpin our
entire global financial system. Yes. And
lastly, every single one of your
companies needs payments. JP Morgan
thinks about payments as a lever for
growth, not just vanilla operational
stuff. They've been investing heavily
with products now for fraud prevention,
FX, working capital, and more. All of
course built enterprisegrade and with
developer tools and APIs. You can learn
more at jporggan.com/acquired,
which itself is a cool custom site
they've built that has details on the
products we've been talking about all
season, plus a little behind-the-scenes
video of acquired live at Chase Center
from last year. When you get in touch,
just tell them that Ben and David sent
you or shoot us a message in Slack, and
we'll get you connected with their team.
All right, David, the Google seed round.
Yes. Here we go. So 8 am the next
morning, Larry and Sergey rouse
themselves out of bed over on the
Stafford campus, head on over to
downtown Palo Alto at Dave's house, and
Andy drives up. He's like, "All right,
I'm in a hurry. Show me what you got."
They demo Google for him. Andy loves it.
He's like, "Great, I'm in. $100,000."
And Larry and Sergey are like, "But we
weren't talking about raising money. We
just wanted some advice to start a
company." Andy's like, "Great. I'll go
get the check from my car.
He writes a check to Larry and Sergey
made out to Google Inc. for $100,000.
Basically just throws it at them, hops
in his car, and takes off.
Google Inc. does not exist yet.
This is actually true. This actually
happened. Andy's like, "You guys figure
this out. That's your problem, not mine.
I'm good for the money." No investment
documents, no valuation. Just here's
$100,000. I assume I will get something
for my investment. Yep. Exactly. And
this was the forcing function for
Google, Inc. to get founded. So Larry
and Sergey need to be able to like spin
up an entity, have that own the
intellectual property from Stanford and
set up a bank account for that entity
such that they can deposit this check
before it expires. It takes a a couple
months to get all this done. Yes. which
depending on who you ask is either very
good or very bad because in the
intervening months Dave himself decides
to throw in another $100,000 to the
funding here and Larry and Sergey meet a
former Netscape guy named Rahm Shriram
who started advising them on starting
this company spinning things out and
longtime acquired listeners will
recognize this name from our Amazon
episode. Oh yes, Rahm had left Netscape
and joined a startup called Jungly that
Amazon.com then acquired. And so Rahm
had a little bit of liquidity. He throws
in for $250,000
into the round. And he's like, "Hey, do
you guys want to meet Jeff?" Jeff Jeff
Bezos,
who at this point, it's kind of
interesting. You think about Amazon and
Google as kind of equally old companies.
Jeff is sort of the elder statesman of
the internet. His company was started in
'94. This is '98. Amazon just went
public the year before. I mean, it's
kind of crazy that at this point in
time, it was little old Lar and Serge
grad students meeting public CEO Jeff
Bezos. Yeah. Yeah. It's almost like when
your six-month old baby is hanging out
with a 14-month-old, you're like, "Oh my
god, they're so different." But like
they're going to be classmates in a
couple years. They're basically the same
age. Exactly. So Rahm arranges a meeting
and the next time that Jeff is in
Silicon Valley, they all meet at Rom's
house and similar to Andy Bealshime,
Jeff's like, "Great Rom, what are you in
for? 250? I'm in for 250, too."
And so all in, they end up raising a
million dollars at a $10 million post
money valuation. And yes, Jeff Bezos
does a quarter of Google's seed round.
It's so crazy. You know, we knew about
this in the past because we talked about
on the Amazon episode, but whenever I
heard someone reference Jeff Bezos was
an angel investor in Google, I always
thought, well, yeah, but you look at any
of these startup cap tables and there's
50 founder friends in addition to the
main VC of that's not surprising at all.
But Jeff is a quarter of the money in
the seed round. Yeah. One of four
investors. Is that right? That's right.
Yep. It's Andy, Dave, Rom, and Jeff.
Jeff has never said whether he sold any
of his Google shares along the way. But
by my math, if he didn't, that stake is
worth about 20 billion dollars today.
And even if he did sell at IPO, he
turned that 250K into something like 200
million at IPO. Right. Right. Right.
Nice returns. And Amazon stock was
probably in the dumpster when Google
went public. So, you know, could have
used the money. Anyway, Google is now an
official company. They've got a million
dollars in cash from their crazy seed
round. It seems like they might burn
through that kind of fast because of
their uh business model of trying to
store the entire internet on uh their
servers. But, you know, you got a
million bucks. You're no longer a
Stanford project. You're spun out. You
got investors. What's next? Well, first
office space.
So famously they go find space in a
Menllo Park garage, a house owned by one
Susan Wajiski who was a manager at Intel
and soon would become herself an early
Google employee and then eventually CEO
of YouTube. Yeah, exactly. But besides
office space, it's time to put your
product out into the world. And I think
it's worth drilling in here. What was
the state of search in 1998 when Google
becomes a company? Yep. I think it's
worth saying a little bit more about two
other players to set the context. The
first is Alta Vista. Folks who are old
enough might remember. Alta Vista pre
Google was like pretty good. It was
pretty good. Alta Vista has a
fascinating history. This is wild. I
didn't know this until doing research
for this episode. Do you know where
Ultimista came from? I do, but most
people don't. Deck Digital Equipment
Corporation. Deck Digital Equipment
Corporation's Western Research
Laboratory, which was their PaloAlto
Research Lab, their equivalent of Bell
Labs. But Deck, I mean, the company we
talked all about in our Microsoft series
where Dave Cutler came from, who wrote
Windows NT, you know, legendary,
legendary company, right? hardcore
enterprise big hardware computing
company. The minicomp computer company
Judy Faulner wrote Epic on a deck mini
computer, right? Yep. This is where
Altivista came from. And the big insight
that they had was you can go crawl the
web to build the index in parallel. So
before Alta Vista, all the other web
crawlers out there that were building
search engines, they were just like
singlethreaded processes. You go crawl
one page and then you go crawl another
page and then you go crawl another page.
And the internet was small enough back
then that people didn't really think to
do it any other way because remember
it's all growing so fast. Oh,
fascinating. And it's a super
parallelizable process. Why not? Oh, and
this makes sense because Deck hardware
would be pretty well suited for this.
They've got a big enterprise appliance
that they need applications for.
Exactly. This is why it was a research
project at Deck. It was a way to show
off the power of their latest enterprise
class servers that they were hawking.
So, if you think about what are the
competitive vectors of search, what
makes one search engine better than
others, it's not just the ranking. Today
people think about page rank and Google
and the innovation and the ranking and
the relevancy that was the most
important thing. There are actually two
other vectors that are critical. Y one
is speed. How fast are you going to
return the results? Which we take for
granted today but not too long before
Google's founding. Search was a thing
where you'd kick off a query and then go
do something else and wait for it to
come back. Right. It was like AI today.
You're doing deep research. You're just
like, "Okay, great. Send a query, you
know, go get some lunch. Come back."
Exactly. We'll get more into speed in a
minute.
But the other attribute that's super
important is the index. How big is the
index of pages that you're searching
across? And before Alt Vista and
parallelization of crawling, all the
indexes of all the other search engines
were super small. Maybe a million pages
was like the biggest. So you could have
the best search engine in the world, but
if you're only getting a small
percentage of the actual sites out there
that it's searching, it's not going to
be that useful. And the funny thing
about this period of time too is very
rarely were people actually updating
their index. So when something would say
like a million pages crawled, that was
cumulative and they just kept adding new
sites to it and assuming you weren't
doing many updates. Right. Right. Right.
Oh man, how times have changed. So when
Alta Vista spins out of deck and
launches as a commercial company, an
entity in and of itself, its big claim
to fame is its index. It has 16 million
pages in its index versus the
competitors. Alt Vista still kind of
sucked at relevancy and speed. So the
information retrieval algorithms that
Alt Vista and others were using was
highly based on how many times a given
query word appeared on the page. So if
you wanted to rank highly for dog food,
you just spam dog food in invisible text
all over your page or even not
invisible, you just want to make the dog
foodiest dog food page on the web.
Exactly. And the other thing that you
know I guess Alta Vista was probably
fine at this but not good was speed. And
that was a particular problem. I mean
Alta Vista had great hardware from Deck
and really expensive hardware too.
That's a main thing to underscore here
is that yeah, they're doing this cool
parallelization thing which leads to a
bigger index, but if they had to be
their own company, it is an extremely
expensive company to run to have all
that deck hardware for search, which we
should say doesn't have a great business
model yet. The business model is just
banner ads, low price, not very
targeted. That would all come later. And
so the whole search market, why would
anyone take it seriously? cuz to date it
doesn't feel like there's a good
business there and to do a really good
job at it, it would be very expensive to
run. Yes, it is funny. As you can
imagine, the powers that be at Deck are
pushing really hard on can we sell more
of these boxes. Do they really want to
be the ones developing the best search
engine or really what they want is for
other people to be developing stuff like
this, see it as a proof of concept and
then start their own companies to buy
more and more deck hardware? Yes,
exactly. Ben, search as a industry was
not interesting. One because the
economic upside was capped and two also
people love directories and portals and
Yahoo. like Yahoo was the big player,
not Alta Vista or Excite or Loss or
Infosek or any of these others. So Yahoo
was the site that was taking off like
wildfire. They'd gone public in 1996 at
a billion dollar market cap. By 1998
when google.com is launching as a
company, Yahoo is a 20 billion public
stock. This is the juggernaut. And what
was so great about Yahoo, like yes, it
was started by Jerry Yang and David Pho,
you know, two other Stanford PhDs, but
it wasn't technologydriven. It started
as Dave and Jerry's guide to the
internet.
It didn't start as their like academic
research. What Yahoo was was exactly
that. It was a handcurated
guide directory to the internet. It was
kind of like the yellow pages with even
better annotations to why you would want
to look at a particular given site. And
that's what people thought like, oh,
technology search engines will never be
able to replace human curation and human
thought about what the most interesting
sites on the web are. Hell, this is why
Larry's original idea was this
annotation idea. It was humans who are
going to rank things. And for the size
that the web was at the time, Yahoo was
correct. Yes, when you have a small
number of total websites, curating them
is interesting. But when you have 10,000
times more,
more niches that people are interested
in, directory is not going to be an
efficient way to surface what people are
looking for. If you believed that the
internet was going to get as big as it
did, search became a more interesting
front door. But for this period of time,
directory was an amazing front door to
the internet. Yep. Now here we are in
1998. The internet is already big enough
that yes, it's clear there are a lot
more interesting web pages out there. So
Yahoo has search to address that.
Exactly. So the model was hybrid. All
these portals and Yahoo included went
hybrid of when you search on Yahoo, the
results you get at the top of the page
are their handcurated directorydriven
results and then they backfill with a
search engine. And so they would partner
with these search engines to provide
backfill results. And people thought
that this was the ideal solution. So
interesting. It is the epitome of kind
of just good enough technology. It was
so different than Google. Google wants
to be the very best technology solution
for a problem, the most elegant. And I
think the Yahoo solution was very, yeah,
yeah, search just has to be good enough.
The curation is sort of the thing that
matters. We're a media company. you
having enough human editors to cover all
the big categories, but the business is
showing banner ads. They may or may not
be relevant to whatever page you happen
to be looking at right now, and we're
effectively a media company that has
search just in case. Yes. Okay. So,
that's what's going on at Yahoo and all
the portals. The opinion of Larry and
Sergey
is a we don't want to do a homepage like
that. We don't want to clutter it up.
Our whole point is to help people find
what they want. Which of course raises
the question, well, what's the business
then? Because if you're not keeping
people on site to see your banner ads,
the only moment that you really have is
on the search box page and on the search
results page. And they were extremely
against, well, really ads generally.
They didn't think it was good for users,
but they were just against especially
banner ads. And there's this sort of
scary thing, which doesn't seem scary
now because we know how it played out,
but just imagine trying to evaluate this
company. It's growing like wildfire.
Everyone's using it. There's one known
business model for this entire sector.
It's not a great one, but it is known.
And these guys are dead set against
using it. But on the other hand, let me
pitch it to you a different way. These
guys are building the front door to the
internet, which was just growing 700%
year-over-year. So, isn't that going to
be really valuable? Yes, but we don't
know how yet. But the problem is
actually even more dire than what you're
saying. As usage is growing, they need
more infrastructure, but they're not
making any money, right? And for each
piece of this, you need more
infrastructure. You need the crawler to
go and crawl the whole web and store,
you know, not entire web pages, but
little pieces of web pages that you can
reference from your index. You need the
index itself. You need to serve the web
pages up for when people are doing the
searches. There's a bunch of components
of this infrastructure that all need to
scale and they all need to scale
differently. Yep. Which brings us to
really what is the second big reason why
Google worked so well and became the
Google we all know today. One is
accurate, relevant, fast search results
and page rank and everything we've been
covering. Two though is the
infrastructure to actually make this
whole thing work and scale efficiently.
Yes. So right after they raise the angel
round, Larry and Sergey go out and they
recruit just like unbelievable top tier
engineers and computer scientists to
come rewrite the code and work on this
infrastructure problem. So pretty
quickly they get Ers Hoa and then Jeff
Dean who are just these absolute
legends. They are both still at Google
today. ERS is now a fellow, but he ran
all of Google's infrastructure from 1999
until 2023. Before joining, he'd done
his PhD at Stanford and he was a
professor at UCSB. He'd also written the
primary Java virtual machine that Sun
used as like the official Java virtual
machine. Oh wow. And Larry and Sergey
recruit him out of academia to come join
as employee number eight. and his
initial job title was search engine
mechanic because quote everything was
broken.
So that's and he builds all this
incredible infrastructure. Jeff Dean who
they also recruit around the same time
from a senior engineer at deck. Yes.
Yes. And Jeff is basically like Google's
Dave Cutler. So today Jeff runs AI at
Google. He also implemented the first
version of AdWords, built AdSense,
rewrote the core search pipeline five
times, co-invented and implemented Big
Table, Map Produce, TensorFlow, and
Gemini.
He actually keeps his resume up to date
online. We'll link to it in the show
notes. It's incredible. We're bearing a
little bit of a lead here. We we spoke
with Jeff to prep for this episode and I
watched a handful of talks he's given.
Uh delightful human and God, what a
great engineer. Just generational
talent. But this is like that early
nucleus of engineers that Google
recruited. It's amazing that they
attracted them because prospects were
not good that all of this would work and
scale. And it was only because of these
guys that it did. Well, and here's the
crazy thing. Later, there's an easy
point to make, which is Google got to
hoover up all the best talent because
they were a solid business after the dot
crash. But this in 989, we're in the go-
go times. the dot bubble hadn't burst
yet and Larry and Sergey managed to
recruit this talent. I think this is
like a history turns on a knife point or
like a make or break the company thing.
The fact that they were able to get
these guys in a hot talent market really
speaks to Larry and Sergey's vision, the
excitement around the idea, how novel
their approach was, everything. Yep. And
part of the reason why this talent was
attracted to Google, sure some of it was
like, "Oh, the product's really good and
people are using it and so that makes
the company interesting." The other part
of it though was that the technical
challenges and the architecture coming
out of Stanford was super unique and
novel. This was a really really
interesting thing to work on. And why
was that? So the Google index that they
needed to build and operate on for the
search engine for page rank to work was
so much bigger than any other index out
there. Google needed like the entire
page to compute all the rankings and
find the links, find the back links.
They needed to architect Google with
this huge distributed computing system.
So the index was so big that it wouldn't
fit on a single machine or a single
server no matter how big or how
expensive. So what they do to store the
index and to operate on it with this
distributed file system is they break
the giant index into tons and tons and
tons of little chunks they're called of
individual 64 megabyte files. Small
files, tractable files, and they get
stored on lots and lots of different
discs and lots of different machines and
lots of different servers and ultimately
different data centers all over the
world. And then there's a separate
server that keeps a master mapping of
all the chunks like where the chunks
physically are. And so when a query
comes in and needs to operate on the
index data, the master server just
returns only the chunks that it needs,
not the whole index. And that makes the
whole thing possible. So basically that
one server you're talking about can kind
of just say, "Oh, all the chunks are
here on all these different machines
that are distributed throughout my data
center. just look at those chunks and
that way it can kind of just pull and in
a parallel way pull from all those
different chunks concurrently. Yeah. And
I think that's even abstracted like from
a compute perspective they see the
master map they feel like they have
access to the whole file but then what's
actually getting returned to them to
operate on is only just the chunk data
that they need. Hm. So, Google was sort
of forced to do distributed computing
because their index file was too large
to store on any one machine, no matter
how big or fancy it could be. Yep, I
think that's right. Which sort of
enables the whole thing in the first
place and is technically extremely
interesting. But now the physical
infrastructure side, all right, because
you have all these chunks and they can
live anywhere and Larry and Sergey
already had to grab commodity hardware,
you know, hard drives and motherboards
directly back at Stanford. Well, Z comes
in and he's like, whoa, we can just keep
going with this. Let's keep using cheap
commodity components and hardware. And
yeah, they'll suck and they'll fail a
lot and things will burn out, but that's
okay. because we've got this distributed
file system, we'll just replicate
everything like three or five times,
right? And we can cleverly design
software to account for the fact that we
have commodity hardware or commodity
RAM. These systems that were not
assembled with the notion of being
enterprisegrade, we can sort of design
Google with the idea to take into
account the fact that the hardware is
not enterprise grade. And that means we
can get cheaper hardware and run in a
distributed computing way. And frankly,
I think this makes it interesting to a
lot of engineers who kind of want to
work on hard problems. How do I design a
system when I can't count on a whole
bunch of stuff from the underlying
hardware that I would get to count on if
it was a fancy deck server? So, I read
that industry average server hardware
failure rate at the time was around like
3 to 4% per year. Google's hardware
failure was over 10% per year.
But the whole system was designed that
it didn't matter. It was all just
replicated. Super interesting. So this
keeps scaling up and up and up over the
years with Google pretty quickly. Maybe
even while Google is still a private
company, they technically become the
world's largest computer manufacturer.
Oh wow. Because they're not buying fully
baked servers. They're just buying
components and assembling them into this
sea of components. proto data center in
their data center and then data centers
and their early data centers they're
never really putting them in PC housing
right yes so these early you know quote
unquote machines they're building
they're not even putting PC cases on
them they just mount the motherboards
directly on corkboard and then they put
like the RAM in there and they put hard
drives in there and then they just stuff
them in their data center racks the
photos of these early Google quote
unquote Server racks are crazy because
the way that their agreements worked in
the colllocated data center facility is
they would lease by square footage, not
by energy consumed, not by number of
mach by square footage. And so when you
give a computer scientist a constraint,
they will optimize for it. And the goal
is how much of Google can I power in
this square footage? And the way that
you optimize around that is well
incredible density of hardware. So we're
not putting cases on these computers.
We're putting corkboards in. And imagine
just a sheet of cork which is an
insulator. So you know that these
electrical components that you don't
want to conduct between each other are
not going to conduct between each other.
And you just stuff a server rack full of
corkboards with all this commodity
hardware sort of strewn about it. And it
looks unbelievably messy. It's extremely
economical and then you just kind of
handle it all in software. And the net
of this is that Google can scale period,
but also can scale way more cheaply as
search traffic rises and as the index
keeps growing and getting bigger than
anyone else out there on the market. So
once the business model kicks in, this
is why Google search has like a 87%
gross margin on it. Yep. There's this
incredible story of Google's first data
center was a collocation data center
facility kind of a shared uh physical
space in Santa Clara called Exodus and
the data center cage the space that
Google had allocated was right next to
the cage for in which was a competing
search engine out there that we'll talk
about in a minute and Google folks talk
about the in cage had all these gleaming
sun machines and lots space and lots of
airflow and all this incredible cable
management and then you had this like
Frankenstein Google thing next to it.
And to your point, Ben, they were only
paying by square footage. They weren't
paying for power. So, they were sucking
up all the power of the data center. And
I heard a story that they actually at
one point may or may not have stolen a
power circuit from the uh Inktomy cage
next door. Borrowed. Borrowed. Borrowed.
Borrowed. Yes. So one fun illustration
of what does it mean to be on commodity
hardware versus enterprisegrade
hardware. Jeff Dean shared a fun story
with us that on enterprisegrade hardware
you would have something in RAM which is
called a par bit. And in consumer grade
hardware you don't and what is a parody
bit? A par bit adds one extra bit to
memory that is basically for error
checking. It looks at the rest of the
data in the bite and if it's even it'll
set the par bit to one and if it's odd
it'll set the par bit to zero. The con
of this is now you need an extra bit. So
it makes the overall machine more
expensive because you're losing 1/8 of
the RAM to this par checking. But the
benefit is you know that nothing ever
got corrupted because the likelihood
that one of your bits got flipped and it
also flipped your parody bit is very low
because you can kind of check and see
wait it's supposed to be an odd number
according to the par bit but it's an
even number so you know likely something
went wrong and when I say something went
wrong this is from like random radiation
that is just flying around the universe
at any given time stuff goes wrong all
the time well because Google is using
this commodity hardware they then have
to do these crazy things in software and
build all these layers themselves to say
we're running on crap hardware. We don't
know for sure that the value in memory
is correct. Can we have a second way of
verifying that it's correct? So it's
that sort of I don't know cool software
engineering but also another layer of
systems that you have to build when
you're on commodity hardware. So the net
of these constraints and the incredible
technical team Google has is that they
design everything from the ground up.
The computing systems, the file systems,
the data centers, the racks, the
hardware, everything. And they built
stuff like GFS, the Google file system,
map reduce. Yahoo would eventually feel
like they needed to copy map produce to
be competitive and they would open
source that as Hadoop. So if people know
Apache Hadoop, that is a Yahoo copy of
Google's map produce. Yep. Of course,
shepherded and stewarded mostly by
people outside of Yahoo eventually, but
that's where it came from. Yep. And then
ultimately, because Google is building
their own hardware, racks, data centers,
and they can do it cheaply, they put
data centers all over the world. And
then that means they can deliver search
results and ad results instantly to
users all over the globe. Yeah. So this
speed really starts to become a bragging
point for Google where whenever you do a
query, it'll show you how long the query
took. It's usually like a quarter
second. And they used to brag about the
index size. Now they say I'm returning a
gajillion results to you. But this was a
really big flex for a long time is we
searched a huge index, billions of
pages. We found a huge number of results
and we did it really fast and we're
going to show all those numbers to you
because a we're engineers and we're
awesome, but b we know it's the best
stats that anyone out there could report
to you. Yep. It's a stake in the ground.
So all this grows out of the constraints
of like they don't have any money first
at Stanford and then this little angel
around they raised. They don't have a
way to generate any money and yeah they
don't have any way to generate any
money. So we cannot overstate how
important Google's infrastructure
innovations were. All this comes out of
these constraints that Google the
company has. But none of this would have
mattered if they didn't figure out the
business model. But before we tell the
story of the building of the best
business model of all time, now is the
perfect time to thank a new friend of
the show, Anthropic, and their AI
assistant, Claude. Yes. So, as we were
doing our research for this episode,
looking through decades of interviews,
SEC filings, technical papers, Claude
was an awesome research partner. I
actually had this crazy thing happen.
I've never had this happen before. I was
asking Claude a bunch of questions about
early Google financials, and it kept
giving me numbers that I thought were
wrong, but the numbers it was giving me
were consistent. So, I went back and I
checked against the numbers in the book
I'd been using. It turns out that Google
actually restated their early
financials, and Claude was all over it.
So Claude actually saved me from making
a somewhat meaningful error later in
this episode. I've never had AI do that
before. Yeah. Now I wish we had Claude
for all what 200 of our other episodes.
Yeah. I also played around with Claude's
extended thinking mode in my research,
especially analyzing Google's S1, which
gave me a bunch of great insights that
we'll share later in the episode. Yep.
This type of research is where Claude
really shines compared to well
traditional web search. Claude can
analyze hundreds of pages of documents
simultaneously. And now with its
connection to Google Workspace, it can
pull insights from files in Google
Drive, check Gmail, and search the
latest information, all while
maintaining context about what you're
actually trying to understand. And
Claude is built by Anthropic, so you
know it has a focus on being helpful,
harmless, and honest. When you're doing
serious research, like we do here at
Acquired, you need an AI you can trust
to be accurate and not just impressive.
Yep. Plus, Claude's new Opus 4 is widely
regarded as the world's best coding
model. So, as you can imagine, we talked
to a lot of engineers doing what we do,
and we keep hearing over and over again
from developers that Claude is their
favorite model. Acquired listeners can
get halfp price on Claude Pro for 3
months using our link at
claude.ai/acquired.
That's cl aud.ai/acquired
or click the link in the show notes.
Yep, Claude thinks with you, not for
you. And trust us, when you're trying to
untangle 25 years of Google history,
that makes all the difference. Our
thanks to Claude and Anthropic. All
right, David. So going from having no
business to the greatest business model
humankind has ever discovered. Not
exactly a straight line, huh? Uh, no,
not at all. So how does it all start? So
early 1999, even despite the incredible
infrastructure work and being able to
scale cheaply, Google's still running
out of money from the angel round. and
they hire a recent Stanford undergrad
named Salar Commonar who joins Google as
employee number nine. And like many
Stanford students at the time, he
started using the search product while
he was an undergrad, was blown away, and
he's like, I got to go work for this
company. He basically bangs down
Google's door, tries to get hired, and
finally they're like, okay, okay, come
on in. And so the first thing that Larry
and Sergey give to him to do is kind of,
you might argue, the most important
thing in the company. They're like,
"Well, we're running out of money, so we
need to go raise venture capital. We
don't want to write the business plan in
the pitch deck. You write the business
plan in the pitch deck."
So Sally goes off and he writes the
pitch deck for the Google Series A, a
collaboration with Larry and Sergey, and
they come up with a threepronged
business model that they're going to
present to VCs, three ways that they're
going to make revenue, and it's handwavy
as hell. Yes. All right. So number one,
the biggest revenue driver projected
going forward, you know, the main Google
business innovative new business model
that they're going to pursue here. They
are going to sell Google search
technology to enterprises
so that companies can use the same
amazing consumer Google search
technology to search their own documents
and internets.
This is the business plan for Google for
the series A. You know what this kind of
feels like to me? It feels like they're
saying Google.com is so precious and
amazing and special. We don't want to
risk it by having to make money on it.
So, can we make money doing something
else with our technology? Yes. That will
fund what we really want to do, which is
Google.com. Now, it's pretty funny to
talk about this. Now, in retrospect,
they did have a couple reasons why they
thought this might work. Number one was
all the way back at Stamford, Back Rub,
and then Google had actually been used
for this use case. you could use Google
to search internal Stanford internet
stuff and people did. It was like a
great experience for Stanford students.
Also, before the series A somehow Larry
and Sergey had managed to actually sell
one of these deals to the company Red
Hat. That's right. That was their first
revenue, right? Was Red Hat. Yeah. The
open source Linux company. They sold
this enterprise search deal to Red Hat
for $20,000. They're like, "Oh, great.
There's a market here." So that was
going to be the main business driver.
And then there were going to be two
other business lines too in the company.
One was going to be, well, sure, okay,
VCs, you know, you make us, we'll sell
ads, CPM banner ads, the same way
everybody else does. We're not going to
like it, but we'll put it in the
business plan. And it seems like they
didn't think through it any more than
that, cuz I couldn't find anything about
is that going to appear on the search
results page? Is that going to appear on
google.com next to the search box? It
seems like it was never real enough to
actually have a plan for it. And indeed,
the series A pitch deck and business
plan like was intentionally vague. I
think part of the reason Larry and
Sergey were like, "Okay, seller, new
guy, you go do this." Is like they
didn't actually want to tell VCs that
much. Yeah. So, that was number two. And
then number three was that they were
going to license Google organic search
results to portals and directories as
essentially OEM search to backfill
results like we were talking about with
Yahoo. Other search engines were doing
this. Inkto had gotten started at this
point in time. Inctomy was the next door
neighbor at the data center Exodus in
Santa Clara. And they built a sizable
business selling white labeled organic
search results to other portals.
Exactly. This was Intim's whole business
is they just sold organic search results
white label to other portals. But
there's five big customers and 50 total
customers out there for this business.
Yep. So this is the business plan. This
is the pitch deck. They go out. Remember
we're in spring 1999 here. So even
though this is a little hairrained, it's
still the dot bubble. Money is still
flowing. There's a great Michael Moritz
quote in Steven Levy's book talking
about this particular moment in time. He
says, "Nobody's feet were on the
ground." This is a very Sir Michael way
of putting things. Deliciously, Michael
quote. Yes. And Google's got all this
usage and engagement and growth numbers
that, hey, internet companies trade on
eyeballs, so of course this is going to
be a hot deal. Famously, Kleiner and
Sequoia end up splitting the deal and
Michael Morates and John Door, the two
most legendary VCs in the world, they
team up, they join forces, they split
the deal and they both join the board of
Google at the Series A, which is unheard
of. The fact that Larry and Sergey were
able to say, "You both only get 12 and a
half% of this company and you have to do
it together." They both must have
really, really, really wanted to do the
deal. That is true. And I love that even
today, even you have that opinion. We
heard from folks in the research that
this really was like a Google PR master
stroke to seed this narrative. Oh,
well, they held a press conference in
person with both Sir Michael and John
Dur. There it's the first Google press
conference. Larry and Sergey are there
in Google branded shirts. Yes, they made
a big deal about this. The reality is
Sequoia and Kleiner split tons of deals.
This was not the first one. It may have
been the first one that Michael and John
split together, but like they had been
on boards together before. Maybe they've
done one round or the other and Sequoa
and Kleiner split deals all the time.
But hey, it was the dot era and
everybody needed a PR strategy and that
one worked well. Fascinating. But the
point is this was a hot deal. There's
all sorts of stories out there about
other investors coming into the round or
trying to get in or trying to get in
later. Yeah, I think in the middle of
negotiations they got another term sheet
at $150 million valuation instead of a
hundred. But I think they were sort of
already pot committed to Sequoa and
Kleiner Perkins. And I actually don't
know who the 150 came from, but I do
know it was someone who Rahm Sriram set
up the meeting with. Interesting. And
remember, Larry's older brother had
co-founded e-groups, which Meritz had
funded at this point. So, like, they
knew they wanted to go with Sequoia and
Kleiner. That was the goal all along.
Yep. Regardless, the round gets done.
$25 million total raise at a $100
million
post money valuation.
A $und00 million valuation was genuinely
wild for the time. Yeah. Even in the
heyday of the.com craziness for a series
A at a 100 post that was newsworthy.
So funny thinking about this today. I
know today it's so quaint. It's so
quaint. The comp in today's world is
imagine reading a headline that a series
A after a company just had a few angel
investors got done at a multi-billion
dollar valuation. That's kind of the way
it would have felt in tech at the time.
Yes, totally. But despite that and
despite all the hype around the series
A, there's still kind of an urgent
imperative to make revenue. Yes, there's
25 million in the bank now, but you've
got VCs involved. And the playbook back
in the do days was invest in the
company, get quick revenue, go public.
Yep. So, there's a fire lit under Google
to figure out the business model. Right
around the same time as the series A
happens, Larry and Sergey meet a guy
from Netscape named Omid Cordistani. And
the first time they meet, I think Omid
is thinking about it in the context of,
oh, I'm wearing my Netscape hat. I'll
evaluate, is there some partnership
here? And I think he quickly gets the
sense maybe, but Netscape just got
bought by AOL. It's getting a lot less
fun here. And Omid was the VP of sales
in Bisdev at Netscape. Yes. So he's very
familiar with building an internet-based
business. And what these Google guys are
doing is very interesting. Yeah. And of
course, Larry and Sergey as the great
recruiters that they are like, "Hey, why
don't you come work here?" So Omid joins
Google essentially as chief revenue
officer and he's tasked with, "Okay,
take this business plan, take these
three areas and make them a reality."
And we should say too, Omid is an
awesome guy. We talked to him in
research. Yeah. So he goes out and of
course the first the innovative business
model that they pitch the VCs you know
number one the enterprise search
business model he goes out and starts
trying to sell it but as you might
imagine especially at the time there
wasn't a lot of uh customer pull shall
we say for this. Yes. So for the first
six plus months of the company, kind of
the rest of 1999 after the venture
funding, things are not looking good on
the revenue front. David, do you
remember, this is way back in Acquired
History, what Doug Leone told us in
February of 2020 when we were recording
our episode with him? Yes. Yes, I know
exactly what you're going to say and
I've got some more flavor on that quote.
You give the quote. Okay. So the quote
is from Sir Michael Moritz. He comes to
Doug and they're running Sequoia Capital
together at the time and he says, "Doug,
we've never paid so much for so little."
And uh that's the lore. I got a little
more behind the scenes flavor on the
quote.
Apparently it was not Sir Michael who
said it first. He might have just been
repeating it back. Apparently was it
John Door? It was Venode. Oh, in the
Kleiner partnership. That's what I
heard. Oh, this is like the hot potato
of quotes. Nobody wants to actually take
credit for this. Either way, though, the
sentiment is right. You can understand
why Kleiner and Sequoia would feel this
way. They kind of have egg on their
faces. They just paid a $100 million
post for a series A company with no
revenue. The revenue is not
materializing. We're now into the year
2000. The bubble is starting to burst
and Google still basically has no
business. Yeah, no business. But growing
market share, fervent loving fandom
among the people using it, providing
real value to people. There's got to be
something here. Yes. Exactly. So the
revenue imperative is becoming well
imperative. More of an imperative, shall
we say? And Omid's a smart guy. He's
like, I'm not going to just keep banging
my head against enterprises here. Like,
we're going to pursue the other two
business lines that are obvious. You
know, who knows how big they'll be, but
at least we'll make some money. So, set
up just regular ads, same way as
everybody else does it. So, Omid goes
and hires Tim Armstrong in New York to
set up an ad sales force. And Google
does start selling ads at the top of
search result pages. And what do these
ads look like, David? So importantly,
Larry and Sergey insisted that, okay, if
we have to have ads on here, they need
to be text only. We can't serve images
and banner ads like everybody else does
because that'll slow down the page. Yes.
It's like they always talk about it for
taste, which is true, but yes, it's a
performance thing. Yes, it's a page
performance thing. So, there these great
stories about Tim in New York and Omid
and the ad salesforce that they're
building up at Google. They're going to
ad agencies. They're going to
advertisers directly. They're trying to
sell these ads and like um no images,
just text. Trust us, it's going to work.
Not very exciting to these Madison
Avenue guys. How are they paying for
them right now? Still CPM. So, you buy a
keyword
and then you're promised that you're
going to be an ad that appears on the
page whenever that keyword is searched
and you're going to pay per thousand
impressions of that keyword. Is that
right? Yes. Okay. Not self-s serve. No
web tools for this. This is like
negotiated over the phone and then they
manually hand it into Google that when
this keyword is searched, you need to
display a text ad for this person and
track how many times you display it
because we then need to invoice them for
how many times the page loads. Yes. Not
even on the phone. That would be really
uh technologically advanced for Madison
Avenue at the time. All ad insertions
were done by fax
at this time. So Google had to install
fax machines at its headquarters to take
these insertion orders for these ads
that they were selling. Awesome. Now
what was the pitch though to Madison
Avenue about why this would work? Intent
baby. Exactly.
So the very first project that Jeff Dean
did when he came over from deck is Larry
and Sergey and Z told him, "All right,
the VCs say we got to sell ads. go
figure out the tech to serve ads on
google.com, but don't do anything to
degrade search or user experience. And
so Jeff works with Marissa Mayer, who
just joined from Stanford undergrad, and
they're like, "Okay, like fine, this is
going to have to just be text. What can
we do as a test to see if we can
engineer something that'll work with
text ads? We could scale, run it against
a bunch of queries." Well, what about
Amazon affiliate links?
We know a guy at Amazon. We know a guy
at Amazon who happens to own a good
chunk of this company. So, Google goes
and signs up as an Amazon affiliate,
which how crazy is this? The Google
business model was validated like doing
customer development, you know, startup
idea validation using Amazon affiliates
as the mechanism. Yes, Jeff Dean codes
it up so that dynamically as users are
searching, if there's a query that is
related at all to any book in the Amazon
library catalog, Google will dynamically
generate a text ad saying, "Go buy this
book at Amazon, insert an Amazon
affiliate link and drive traffic over to
Amazon." And the amazing thing is, of
course, it actually works. Now, whatever
the Amazon affiliate commission, you
know, if it's 4% or 5% of the revenue of
a $10 book, obviously is not going to
change Google's fortune in the amount of
money that they'll generate from this.
But it's a test. It's a test and it's
proof that they can then take to
advertisers, we can capture intent and
we can send highly monetizing traffic to
you based on the keywords that you are
buying. And so, if you think about the
funnel steps, there's the impression of
an ad. Hey, they saw the ad. Then two,
there's the click. They click through
the page. Then three, there's the onpage
conversion. It would be one thing to
just test click-through rate, which
would have shown a great result here
because click-through rates on search
ads are higher than ads that are just
randomly around the internet because
someone is intending to buy something.
They have high intent. That's a great
place to show an ad. The click-through
rate is going to be higher. But what
they also know because it was an Amazon
affiliate links is they know the
downfunnel number too. They know
conversion is actually higher from this
traffic because we got to know how many
books on Amazon were sold from the
number of impressions that we served. So
they can say this intentbased ad system
has high click-through rate and high
conversion. Yeah, they're just text ads,
but you're going to like the numbers.
This is ultimately a math problem. Yeah,
it was an absolutely
brilliant
test and bootstrap of the first step of
the Google ad model. Yep. So, that's
sort of gen one of the Google Ads
business. And they get it set up, it's
going, it's making some money, they're
winning some clients on Madison Avenue,
like good, great. The more interesting
piece for the next year, year and a half
is the OEM search portal deals.
And there's some big deals to come.
Netscape, Yahoo, AOL, this is white
labeling Google search to be the search
powering other places search activity
that has tons of traffic, which oh by
the way is also going to train huge
portions of the internet to use Google
search. Yes, it is. And specifically,
what were the portal deals at this
period of time before Google had a real
functioning paid search business? What a
portal deal represented was just letting
a portal use Google search to power
their organic search and in exchange
just getting paid a fee for that. Yep.
It was the Inctomy business model. It
was exactly that. We're selling our
search results for you to use on a
thirdparty page and it's effectively
like a B2B supplier. They're a vendor to
a portal more or less. Yes. It turns out
though that we're still in the era of
the internet where portals are pretty
big. Ton of traffic. And they're not
just any old vendor. They're a vendor
that at the bottom of every page says
powered by Google. Yes. So pretty
quickly after Omid joins from Netscape
back in 1999,
he goes back to his old colleagues at
Netscape AOL and gets essentially like a
proof of concept deal done with them.
And that's for Google to backfill
organic search results on Netscape's own
directory service that they just
launched to compete with Yahoo. So, it's
interesting. We always think about
Netscape, the browser, but this was
presumably like the Netscape homepage.
Whenever you opened up, you know, it
would go to Netscape.com or something
and there'd be all these Netscape
services there available, one of which
was search. Yep. And I presume having
been acquired by AOL, this was now more
of a strategic priority for Netscape
because this is AOL's like whole
business model at this point besides
the, you know, monthly dialup fees,
right? Worth remembering AOL way, way
bigger at this point. Tens of millions
of people using AOL, way fewer going
through netscape.com to deliver traffic
to this Google search. This is sort of
the small part of the organization
they're working with right now. Yep.
Exactly. But relative to how small
Google actually is at this point in
time, it's huge. still big enough that
when they flip the switch and Google on
Netscape goes live with Google powering,
you know, organic search results,
there's so much traffic that it blows
out Google's infrastructure. Well, it
comes close. Basically, they're watching
the analytics like a hawk. OM gets an
urgent call from Sergey saying the
traffic is about to tip over. And this
is potentially company killing cuz this
is their big strategic priority. If they
prove that they are untrustworthy to
Netscape and can't deliver, then how are
they going to keep Netscape's business,
let alone get any other portal deals or
be able to go sell to enterprises that
they're thinking they're going to do at
this point in time, right? So, they
cannot tip over. And so, they have this
pretty tough decision to make. But
actually, it's not even a decision at
all. This is obvious. We are shutting
off google.com for today and we are
going to prioritize all traffic from
Netscape for our servers until we can
stand up more machines. Yeah, just think
about this for a minute. Think about
everything that Google is today. Never
goes down. Universally available
basically everywhere in the world on
every device. It's freaking Google. In
1999,
they shut Google down so that they could
serve Netscape's users. Yes. I mean,
look, the revenue is very material
coming from this and the reputational
impact is very material. Like I said, it
sounds like a hard decision. It's
actually not a decision at all. It also
ends up being the right strategic
decision because of what you mentioned a
minute ago of the powered by Google logo
at the bottom. Sure, you shut off
google.com for a day and your own Google
users of course don't like that, but
you're training millions of new Google
users who are going to see powered by
Google at the bottom. And they got
trained. I mean, so the Netscape deal
brought in 3 million total searchers per
day. And at first, Google's sitting
there begging these early portals, hey,
please put Powered by Google on and
really trying to get that inserted in
the deal. Later on, Google got so well
known for having quality fast search
results on a big index that it was a
value proposition to show your users,
oh, our search is powered by Google. It
becomes the Intel inside of search. Yes.
It's the ingredient brand. That's
exactly right. So now they've got some
distribution, millions of users, but
still very little revenue in June 2009.
Yep. So over the next year or so,
obviously they're working on the other
business models too, but OMIde keeps
signing up, you know, some smaller
portals, some international portals on
the success of the Netscape deal,
getting more of these OEM portal deals
for Google. And then they start working
on the big kahuna, Yahoo. Yes. But
before we tell that story, now is a
great time to thank one of our favorite
companies, Statzig. So David, it's
funny. In a way, Google was the first
modern software company in the way we
think about them today with super cushy
campuses, an engineering first culture,
20% time, which was copied by fast
growing startups who wanted to be like
Google. Yep. Google also pioneered
something else we take for granted,
though, which is great data tools for
product and engineering teams. Google
was really the first company to make
analytics dashboards, AB testing,
feature controls, and other tools
accessible across thousands of engineers
and data scientists that they'd
ultimately scale to. These tools enabled
a fast-moving bottoms up approach to
product development. So, just like
Google's office and culture, this
practice also became the norm for future
tech companies. And for the past 15
years or so, every major tech company
has had entire teams of people
rebuilding this stack of tools
internally for themselves. But something
interesting is happening with the latest
generation of tech giants. Rather than
building these tools themselves,
companies like OpenAI, Figma, Atlassian,
Brex, Notion, Anthropic, they're just
using Statsig. Yes, Statsig has rebuilt
this entire suite of data tools that was
available at just 10 or 15 big giant
companies as a standalone company
itself. This is experimentation with
proper statistical analysis, feature
flags for safe deployments, session
replays, analytics, and more. All backed
by a single set of product data. And
using Statsig is not just about saving
engineering time. It's about getting
worldclass infrastructure from day one.
Rather than arguing about metric
definitions or troubleshooting broken
tools, your team can just focus on
building a great product. And since they
process an enormous amount of data,
Statsig does, trillions of events per
day, they also scale with you. And if
you already have your own set of product
data, they make it easy to extend into
their tools. Statig is warehouse native,
so they can plug directly into your
existing product data, whether it's in
Snowflake, BigQuery, whatever. Yep. So,
if you're interested in giving your
product team access to incredible data
tools, go to statsig.com/acquired.
They have a generous free tier with a
$50,000 startup program and affordable
enterprise plans. That's stats
satsig.com/acquired
and just tell them that Ben and David
sent you. All right, David. So, how did
Google get big? In June of 2000, they
sign a deal with Yahoo right as the
whole world is falling apart. The dot
bubble is bursting. The peak of the
NASDAQ was March 2000. In June of 2000,
Google signs the deal with Yahoo that
they are going to take over all organic
search result back fills on Yahoo.com
with the powered by Google branding. And
Yahoo is going to invest $10 million in
Google as part of this deal.
What a deal. This totally saves Google.
Between the revenue that they got from
Yahoo for this and the $10 million
investment, it keeps the company going
through the next couple years of the dot
winter until they figure out the AdWords
business model. Yep. So traffic doubled
to 14 million searchers per day on day
one of this deal, June of 2000. We're
now a year later than the Netscape deal.
So started to get a material portion of
web traffic here with 14 million
searchers per day. Yep. And the next
year in 2001, the first full year of
this Yahoo portal search deal, Yahoo
pays Google $7.2 million for organic
search results. So it's material. And
again to underscore between the $10
million investment, this revenue, the
other portal deals, Netscape, others,
and then others that they're able to get
on the back of Yahoo,
this revenue really bridges the company
through the dot winter. That's such a
good point and something that's often
pretty overlooked that there was no
potential for Google to raise more money
here. the venture capital gravy train
was over. And so we're sitting here
saying, "Oh, they really need to make
money and when are they going to turn
the revenue switch on?" And we're sort
of like hand ringing over here. We're
only 2 years into the company's life.
Think about startups today. You don't
have expectations of profitability.
Yeah. Exactly. Within a couple years of
founding, but Google's got a very
expensive business to run between the
people and the infrastructure. and
there's no more ability to finance it.
So revenue really was the only option.
So in the midst of all of this, as
Yahoo's coming online, the board is also
pushing Larry and Sergey to hire a CEO.
Yes. So as part of the series A process,
John Door had very begrudgingly
extracted a promise from Larry and
Sergey to hire a quote unquote
professional CEO. Larry was CEO for the
series A and then CEO for the next
couple years after the series A. They
really didn't want to do it. They were
dragging their feet. It took 16 months
to find a CEO. I don't think that was
entirely because it was hard to find
someone. I think some of that was h
let's see how long we can get away
without one. Yes. My favorite story from
the whole Google CEO hiring process was
sort of the standard playbook here that
John and Mike and Sequo and Kleiner
would run with founders when convincing
them to hire a CEO is take them around
the valley, take them on the tour, have
them meet the CEOs of the great
companies in the valley of the public
companies and say, "Look, see what a
great CEO can do for your business."
So they do this with Larry and Sergey.
They go around, they meet everybody in
the valley. They're unimpressed. They
don't like any of them. And finally,
after months of this, they come back and
they tell Kleiner and Sequoa, "All
right, there's one person that we met in
this whole process who we think meets
our bar who we would be willing to come
in and hire as our CEO here at Google."
Oh god. Who is it? Steve Jobs. Really?
Yes. Yes. Yes. Cuz wasn't he like an
idol of theirs? Yeah. Well, and he had
just come back to Apple from Next.
Whether they really meant it or not, I'm
sure if Steve had been willing to come
be CEO, they probably would have said
yes, of course. But I think it was more
like a hey, a little thumbming their
nose at the VCs like we're keeping our
buyer high. It's Steve Jobs or nothing.
Wow.
So great. Also deeply ironic given what
was to come between Apple and Google. 10
years later. Yeah, but that is for the
next episode. So anyway, it was a pretty
contentious process through all of it.
You know, 16, 17, 18 months in. Finally,
Eric Schmidt emerges as probably the
only viable candidate out there. And I
think Eric was acceptable to both sides,
both because he was an actual engineer
and had been at Sun, he was CEO of
Noville. He was a business person, too.
who he'd been a CEO, been a CEO of
public company and you know famously he
hit the ven diagram of everything. He
also went to Burning Man as did Larry
and Sergey, right? And so Eric joins in
March of 2001
and again I think Larry and Sergey were
still kind of resentful of the process.
I think it did come to work pretty well
and they and Larry especially realized,
hey, there's parts of being a CEO,
especially as we're getting bigger, that
like I don't really like and Eric can do
those things. I don't really want to run
a finance org. I can have Eric do those
things. And it ended up working really
well at a critical moment for the
company where they needed revenue, they
needed to build a business, and they
needed to scale. Yeah. And the three of
them kind of ran the company together. I
think they had a daily standing meeting.
So, it wasn't like there was a CEO that
took over and put the founders out to
pasture. It was CEO and then Larry was
president of products and Sergey was
president of technology. But really, it
was like there are three people running
this company together. Yep. And a
trusted relationship between three
people is just more manpower than two
people. Yeah. And the organization at
this point was so we haven't talked
about googliness yet. Yes. Let's talk
about googiness. Uniquely googly that
there would have been organ rejection if
Eric tried to take a heavier hand. I
mean he really kind of came in with a
lens toward learning and understanding.
There was somebody who decided very
early in his tenure, maybe even on his
first day to move into his office with
him cuz there wasn't enough space
anywhere else. And so he was like camped
out like an engineer at Google. had an
office mate for many months with an
engineer and you know it's sort of this
googliness. It was a little bit of like
an acid test for him. Yeah. Right. But
this giant worldview, let's solve big
problems together. Can we think bigger?
Uh no matter how crazy the solution, if
it sounds like a good idea, it's worth
running down. Googliness is kind of
utopian in a way that makes all other
companies look almost like an an evil
empire. It feels like a university in a
lot of ways. Yeah, that was the culture
there. And they wanted the mentality of
a campus too where they want
inexperienced people who don't know what
they don't know. So they try novel
approaches to problems. They collaborate
more than they otherwise would have.
Yeah. But who are really high
horsepower. Yeah. Everyone there was
ludicrously high IQ from the very
beginning. But I think that sort of
collaborative utopian thing went along
with the IQ. The phrase that I heard a
lot in the research from talking to
folks who are early Google was a healthy
disregard for the impossible was like
the modus operendi there. And it's this
culture that comes up with a mission
statement to organize the world's
information and make it universally
accessible and useful. I mean this was
in 1999 in their very first press
release after the financing that has
been the mission statement. It's also
amazing how much that mission statement
scaled. Yes, I was going to save this
for way later in analysis, but organize
the world's information. Not too broad,
not too narrow, in many ways altruistic
to attract the right type of talent that
you want, but also one that lends itself
to tremendous monetization. If you're
going to organize the world's
information and you have a bunch of
smart people, you are going to be able
to create a money printing machine based
on organizing the world's information.
They actually have a great quote in
their IPO perspectus. We believe that
the most effective and ultimately the
most profitable way to accomplish our
mission is to put the needs of our users
first. So there's this almost like
trifecta of wonderfully altruistic
sounding mission A that B lends itself
to this incredible monetization model. C
as long as we're putting the needs of
our users first. Yep. And I think Eric
really bought into this because it was a
risk. Even though he joined Google in
2001 and a lot of these portal deals
were already underway. The Yahoo portal
deal had already happened. It wasn't
clear that Google was going to be like a
smash hit home run. I think it was clear
that it was going to survive and they
had enough revenue and they could be
profitable. But we're talking about
somebody who's the CEO of a public
company, Noville, and taking a risk to
come back to a private company that yes,
had a lot of usage, but hey, startups
are out of favor now. And I think it was
really him making a bet too of like, no,
this is what I want and I'm going to buy
into this. Yep. Totally agree. All
right. So, what was Eric walking into
here with Google and call it spring of
2001? We're now through getting the
Yahoo portal deal done. Basically
stabilized the ship, saved the company.
Google's going to survive the dot crash
between the $10 million investment from
Yahoo plus the revenue from that portal
deal. Eric hasn't started yet, but Larry
and Sergey now turn their attention back
to ads, and they're really not happy.
like the current state of play with ads,
even though it's working to a certain
extent and advertisers are happy, there
are a bunch of problems with it. One,
it's all still hands sold on Madison
Avenue. So, like the market of the pool
of potential advertisers is nowhere near
as big as the pool of potential
searchers and intent that's happening on
Google, right? They can't really scale
this business. And so, it would require
getting an enormous amount of spend from
each of the small number of customers
they already have. Yep. And then scale
too. Another reason it's not going to
scale well is that it's all sold by
hand. So as you scale the business and
you scale the number of advertisers,
you're going to need to scale the number
of people you need to sell by hand. Like
that sucks. Then you end up looking just
like Yahoo. Yeah. So that's on the
scaling side. Then on the experience
side, the user experience side, there's
no notion of ad quality here. Google as
a value proposition to its users is we
give you the highest quality, most
efficient, best search results possible.
We help your needs the best and the ads
aren't really lining up with that.
There's no way to make sure that they're
good. Yes,
exactly. So, that's a problem. And then
four, Google's just flat out leaving
money on the table. They're giving
advertisers this great product of, hey,
we have intent of people searching for
these keywords, but Google's just
getting paid on a straight CPM basis for
what they're selling. They're not
participating in the economic value, and
they're pricing a little bit kind of
finger in the air on what the price of
any given keyword should be. Exactly.
So, now fall of 2000, they're like,
"Okay, let's address this." Yes. So all
four of those issues are things that
Google's going to address in this next
evolution of AdWords. But there's a
whole part of the world that heavily
inspired
AdWords v2. Yeah. Adwords v2 uh you
might say is Google's Instagram stories
moment. Yes. There was an innovator in
the space called Overture or its
original name goto.com. We should tell
you that story now. So go to Bill Gross
started the company out of his startup
incubator Idea Lab and he did it with
quite a bit of flare coming to the world
from the TED conference in February of
1998. So same time as Google's about to
launch right and at the time existing
search engines as you'll remember had a
problem. This is the same exact problem
that Larry and Sergey recognized.
Quality was going down. In the old world
keyword matching algorithms were fine.
There was no one gaming the algorithms.
There wasn't a lot of real commercial
activity yet. And search engines weren't
well understood yet. And so the old,
hey, go search for dogs and the most
relevant website is probably the one
that says dogs the most. That still kind
of worked. Yeah. So now you're starting
to get in 1998 all this stuff like
keyword stuffing, white text on a white
background, people getting porn sites to
appear in search results no matter what
you're searching for, hijacking traffic,
all that sort of stuff. So, Bill had
this very radical idea. The best search
results should be determined by the free
market with dollars. Whoever is willing
to pay the most is probably the very
best search result for your given query.
And spammers who aren't relevant to your
search can't afford to pay because
there's not going to be super high
conversion. But super legitimate
businesses that would actually solve the
pain point that you're searching for
could. Just like how yellow pages in the
phone book had paid inclusion as a
philosophy that would lead to only the
most relevant listings for any given
category, right? And at the time, this
was like a completely crazy idea, but
when you think about it, it actually
does make sense. If I have a product or
service that can solve the need you're
expressing for through your your intent
in the search, I should be willing to
pay more than anybody else to meet your
needs. Absolutely. It's just a different
way of solving ranking and relevance
than Larry did. Larry and Sergey sort of
figured it out on the organic side and
Bill sort of figured it out on the paid
side. So, Bill went so far as to uh go
to didn't actually develop any organic
search technology on their own. They
relied it was all paid. Yes. Only on
paid listings. And if you kept
scrolling, they actually did show
organic results, but they would license
them from Inc. to me and others, David,
like you were saying, as a backfill. All
right. So the net of all this on the TED
stage, Bill gets wildly criticized for
this. Some people even booed the idea
when he was on stage at TED, but crazily
Bill's idea was basically right and it
had a ton of ideas that would become a
part of Google that we'll talk about
here in a minute. So here's how it
worked. When you searched, Goto would
show you a list of the paid results
exactly in order of who paid the most
with no fanciness at all beyond that.
and they would show you the price that
someone was willing to pay for your
click. So right there on the page you
could see 21 cents, 23 cents, 24 cents.
Yeah, it was fully transparent. Yes. So
insight number one, paid ads on keywords
auctioned off to the highest bidder
showing up first. Insight number two,
and again this is way back in 98, was
that this whole cost per thousand
impressions thing was wrong and that
eventually he thought the whole world
was going to move beyond this to a cost
per click or pay-per-click pricing. And
so he thought, why not just do it today?
And so Goto Advertisers only had to pay
when a user actually clicked. And the
origin of this is since Bill had a bunch
of companies at Ideal Lab, he could
uniquely feel this painoint. He sort of
hated the fact that he was getting build
for all these impressions at his
companies when he just wanted to pay for
the actual clicks. I mean, this is how
advertising worked throughout all of
human history to this point. You know,
there's that famous John Womaker quote
of half the money I spend on advertising
is wasted. The problem is I just don't
know which half. This new model of
performance-based advertising wasn't
possible until the internet when you
could track clicks and conversions. But
now all of a sudden as an advertiser you
don't have to worry anymore about what's
wasted. You know it's all performing.
And the nuance is CPM actually works
fine in brand building situations but on
conversion you actually care about the
click. So basically with cost per click
you're getting free exposure every time
your ad shows up but nobody clicks on
it. But in a high intent environment
you're not trying to get exposure.
You're trying to actually capture the
clicks. So, it's kind of reasonable the
way that it shook out that a lot of
brand-based advertising is still CPM
based, but on search engines, it totally
should be CPC. So, how did it go? Well,
it worked insanely well out of the gate.
Go to did a 100red million in revenue in
one year.
Way more than Google. Yes, this is a
good business model. They have found by
the way this is also selfserve.
There is a website where you as an
advertiser can log in and place a bid.
There is an auction that happens, you
know, a real-time auction where the
person with the highest bid, again,
placed through the website is on the
very top. Does this sound familiar to
anyone who's used Google's advertising
tools? So, the 100 million happened in
year 1. By mid1 1999, they had 8,000
advertisers.
Compare that against what AdWords had
when they launched in October of 2000,
which was 350 advertisers in the beta
program. To your comment about scale,
David, this can just scale to so many
more advertisers. Go to goes public
within a year. Yeah. Isn't this crazy?
You're probably sitting there thinking
like, how are they not the dominant
player? So, one thing that did not
happen was patents.
They did not patent the idea of the
auction or of pay-per-click. And I got
the chance to talk to Bill when we were
prepping for this episode. He's very
direct about all this, very reflective,
also a brilliant guy. He just thought
they were obvious. He just thought this
is the way it should be done. Of course,
it should be build perclick. Of course,
there should be an auction and the
highest bidder uh is the one that that
wins. So, the nuts and the bolts of it
are that right before going public, the
lawyers flagged, hey, you really should
patent some of this. but they were just
outside the window of what was
patentable because he shared them more
than a year ago on stage at TED. So the
ideas were no longer eligible. The TED
conference. That's amazing. There's some
really interesting background to all
this too. You would think, of course,
Bill was right. This stuff is obvious.
Why had nobody tried this until 1998?
Somebody actually had tried this
earlier. There was a search engine
called Openext that did try paid search
results in 1996,
but the internet was still enough of
sort of a utopian uh community like
small enough and sort of an outgrowth of
academia that I mean people booed Bill
Gross and Goto on stage at TED in 1998.
In 1996 when OpenEx tried to do this, it
was like they got kneecapped right away.
Heresy. Yeah. Yeah. It was heresy. And
because that happened, everybody else
had a hangover from it of like, oh,
that's like a third rail. You can't
touch that. Internet users will never
tolerate paid search, right? So, it's
funny. Maybe they wouldn't have gotten
the patents anyway since Open Text was
doing it before, but that was the ethos
of that early web is how dare you litter
our organic results with your paid
inclusion, putting these ads front and
center. Look, originally Larry and
Sergey were thinking this too, right?
Yeah. The great irony is all this
criticism. We're going to flash forward
for a second. When Google does launch
AdWords V2, there's a sidebar with a
separate color. It looks super
different. The word sponsored is very
clear. You are very aware that you're
looking at like a whole separate pane
over there. That's the paid icky world
relative to my beautiful clean Google
search organic results. Anyone who's
used Google in the last few years knows
the world basically ended up exactly the
way Bill Gross envisioned. It's one
column of results. The first few are
sponsored. In Google's case, they label
them even less than Bill was labeling
them at goto and then it's followed by
the organic results after that. So what
was once criticized as absolutely
heretical has come to become basically
the dominant model of search and search
monetization today. Yeah. But the
interesting thing is the timing was not
right in the mid '9s for this. Yes. By
the time the bubble was sort of fully
inflated, the internet had become
commercial enough that hey, it was okay
for Bill to try this. And then he and Go
to Overture set the example of like, oh,
oh, this is how you're going to monetize
search. This is really how you're going
to monetize the internet. And then
Google can look and see, oh, maybe we
should do that, too.
Yes. So, a couple of quick things.
Overth did file some smaller patents on
the self-s served tools. Google did
eventually end up owing them $360
million for infringing. But these big
ideas, CPC, auction, those are now out
there given to the world for free. So,
within the next two years, they realize
that they can take this paid search
model they have and bring it to portals
too. So just like Google started doing
organic portal deals, GoTo starts doing
paid portal deals. This goes so well
they become a B2B company. They rebrand.
This is when they switch from Goto to
Overture. They start powering the ads
for Dog Pile, Metaarch. Then they get to
the big boys with AOL and MSN and
eventually they get Yahoo. Yahoo alone
was a hund00 million deal. You know,
Google's playing over here in like fun
pennies on the ground land where they're
please sir give me some money for the
organic results and meanwhile overure
has it figured out these paid results we
are doing massive massive white label of
share deals. Once they get to Yahoo some
huge percentage of Yahoo's overall
company revenue becomes paid search ads
powered by overture. Right. Yes. I think
it's like 75%. So, let's just flash all
the way forward to this. Yahoo ends up
buying Overture for 1.6 billion. There's
a little bit of a bidding war back and
forth with Microsoft, but that's the
final price. Yahoo basically says, "We
have to own this thing." I mean, it is
our revenue. And Yahoo Market Cap had
gotten decimated when the bubble popped.
So, this was a large portion of Yahoo's
market cap that they spent for overture.
Yep. But what choice did they have? They
were over a barrel. It was the majority
of their revenue was coming from this
vendor who was rev sharing with them.
Yep. Okay. So, David, to end the
overture story before we go over to what
did Google learn from all this and start
implementing some fun trivia. Did you
know that Goto tried to acquire Google?
I did not know that. So, here's how it
went down. I asked Bill about this. Bill
thought it was a match made in heaven.
So, Google's got the best way to bring
relevant organic search with page rank.
Really amazing for informational
non-commercial searches. And GoTo has
this amazing paid system for the
commercial searches. You should totally
have one system that marries
informational queries and commercial
queries together. It's got the two best
ways to surface relevant things to you,
one paid, one organic. And Larry and
Sergey before they raised the Sequoia
and Kleiner round came to Bill and said,
"What about 200 million?" Wow.
Bill thinks, "Actually, seems fine. This
seems fair. You guys are really on to
something." They were had a chance of
getting acquired for 2x the valuation of
that extreme fund raise, right? Wow. Was
overture already public at this point?
Yes. So then Bill goes to the rest of
the Overture board and Overture at the
time is worth $2 billion and the board
their conclusion is basically how could
we give up 10% of our very important
valuable revenue generating company to
this little company with zero revenue.
It' be a dilutive transaction
and so no deal. Well, there's almost
zero chance that Google becomes Google
if that deal had happened. So, yeah,
exactly. That's the thing with these
like what would have happened otherwise
acquisitions. Yeah, that's amazing.
Well, okay. So, back to fall of 2000
when Larry and Sergey and Google can now
finally focus on improving their ads
product. You I think we heard this from
folks in the research. Once they saw how
well the goto and overture model was
working, I think Larry and Sergey were
kicking themselves of like, ah, we
should have just done this from the
beginning. Like, why did we waste time
doing this the other way? And like,
yeah, it's going to take a lot of
technology to build this out and like,
yeah, we're going to have to focus on
it, but it's obviously the better
business. Obviously, Larry and Sergey
geniuses from their childhood through
their undergrad research projects. the
way that they conceptualize the original
page rank algorithm, everything truly
geniuses. But the second superpower on
top of that is it doesn't always need to
be their idea. They're very good at
hearing the best idea, whether it's from
outside of Google or someone else inside
Google and adopting that and making that
the thing that they run with. So October
2000, they put Salar on the project to
improve AdWords. The first obvious thing
that they need to do is they need to
build a self-s served system. As long as
Google's still taking manual orders for
ads, they're not going to be able to
implement any of the technology to bill
people per click or anything like that
or let in smaller advertisers and expand
the pool. Exactly. Which clearly
Overture had shown there was a market
for this if they had 8,000 advertisers
against Google's, you know, couple
hundred. Yes. That they were selling by
hand. Famously, by the way, Tim Draper
was looking to invest in Overture and
eventually did lead their round. And to
test it out, he actually opened up his
computer and he bid on the keyword VC
when they were pitching him.
That's amazing. That's the like
historical proof that I have that
Overture had self-s serve and then he
got outbid. It was like one penny, two
penny and then he he started a bidding
war over the term VC.
Ah, that's such a great story. I love
it.
Okay, so obviously they need self-s
serve. That's the first thing to work
on. But Salar and Larry behind the
scenes too are clearly thinking like,
okay, how do we do this in a googly way?
Yes, we're going to borrow a lot from
overture, but I think they had a Spidey
sense already that like a that wasn't
googly, you know, we're so pure over
here, but also that it wasn't quite
right that Overture had gotten like
threequarters of the way there on
cracking the business model. Yep. And so
the thing that Salar and the team really
start noodling on is we've got this
beautiful algorithm in page rank that
can deliver highly relevant organic
results. Is there a way that we could
incorporate something like that into our
ad system as well and ensure ad quality?
Like yes, the paid system in it in and
of itself goes a long way towards
ensuring ad quality, Ben, as you were
talking about earlier, but there's
there's still potential for abuse here.
Y what can we do to really make sure
that these things are good? Well, okay,
if we're an online self-served system,
we're measuring clicks, we're going to
ultimately switch to pay-per-click, we
could track those click-through rates.
And what if we made that a signal to the
ranking of how we show the ads? I mean,
it's not just like fully paytoplay where
if you pay the most, you get placed at
the top, but actually we incorporate as
part of our ad ranking system how
effective your ads are at click-through
rate. That might solve the problem. Such
is the birth of ad rank. You've got page
rank that uses all the clever things we
talked about earlier with number of
people linking to you and how
authoritative those sources are for the
organic results to make sure that the
most relevant results are being surfaced
to you. Now we have a way over in the
paid side of the house with ad rank to
take all the great stuff that we just
talked about with overure, the self-s
serve model, the auction, the cost per
clickbased system, and we add in
click-through rate, and we feed it back
into the algorithm, creating ad rank,
which is really the main two things
going into where is your ad going to be
positioned in the ranking. It's both how
much you're willing to bid and it's how
often are users actually clicking
through so they know that it's the right
ad to be showing at that right moment.
Click-through rates are a proxy for
relevance. Yes. And by the way, as a
really nice side benefit of that, if
your formula for placing ads is a
combination of the price that an
advertiser is willing to pay per click
and the click-through rate of the ad,
well, that's actually the mathematically
optimal formula for maximizing your own
revenue as Google. H. Oh, that's
interesting. Highest price paying per
click and then the highest likelihood to
click. That is the ad that you should
show to maximize your own revenue. Oh,
it's basically an expected value
calculation. Exactly. Oh, that's funny.
But it's also perfect for advertisers
because it means that if you're a better
advertiser for that keyword, then you
actually get to pay a lower price. If
people are more natural to click through
to your service and transact on your
product, you get the privilege of
bidding lower prices and still winning
the auction. All incentives are aligned
for the user. Oh, and for the user
because then it means that the user is
only ever seeing products that are the
most relevant. Yep. So, it's funny how
all of this gets rolled out. It's fall
of 2000. They start working on this. The
first version they launch includes
self-s serve and includes ad quality,
but it doesn't yet include CPC or the
auction, which is funny. It's sort of
like they did the hardest technical
stuff first. Interesting. So this first
rev in the fall of 2000 attracts a ton
of advertisers. You've now opened the
floodgates to the longtale of
advertisers and you've introduced this
click-through rate element, this ad
quality element, you know, ad rank to
how ads are going to get served.
Advertisers pretty quickly figure out
they're still paying on a CPM basis, not
on a perclick basis. They figure out
that they can game the system by
clicking on their own ads. So, because
that'll boost the click-through rate and
then their ads will get shown more.
That's so funny. And they're not paying
per click. So, they're not costing
themselves money when they're clicking
on the ads. Right. It's actually an
efficient use of impressions to use them
internally to boost click-through rate.
Exactly. So, it becomes like for a set
of months, the greatest arbitrage in the
history of the internet was to click on
your own ads. That's so funny. On
Google. But it proves that like, okay,
this is going to work. So then they
fully borrow after that. We're now into
2001. They borrow the rest of the model
from Overture with the cost per click
payment basis and the auction model.
Now, interestingly, they do one up
Overture on the auction model. They go
to the second price auction. This is
such a genius mechanic. There's like
eight genius mechanics we've talked
about so far in the episode, but this
one really sings. If you're the winner
of an auction, they make it so you never
have to pay anything more than one penny
above second place. So, let's say I bid
20 cents, you bid 30 cents, and then
some other guy bids 50 cents. Well, that
other guy is going to win, but he's only
going to have to pay 31. And you might
say, well, that's silly for Google.
Like, they're leaving money on the
table. But what Google is thinking is
with a much longer lens and saying,
"Well, we'd rather have our advertisers
a trust us and feel like we're not
gouging and b not feel like they have to
constantly like check and fiddle and
look to see who the other biders are and
if they want to adjust their price, it's
actually a long-term value maximizing
thing to do. Even though in the short
run, of course, you're leaving pennies
on the table each click." It's a version
of um uh Ben, you have this theory that
you and I have been talking about that
every great company has like a stored
potential energy of value maximization
that it doesn't fully maximize. Like
Costco is the the extreme example of
this, but Google has this too. That's a
great point. Yeah, the second price
auction is storing potential energy in a
way. So, there's a fun story around
this. As you can imagine, this is a
little hard to explain to advertisers
when they roll it out, like how this
works, why it's going to be good for
them, etc. They used to just write one
check and send a fax and that check
bought them a big batch of impressions
and now you have this confusing morass,
right? So, there's a fun little story
about how to educate advertisers around
how this model works. All of this, the
sort of full version of AdWords that we
know today had launched at the very
beginning of 2002. And Cheryl Samberg
had joined the company right around that
same time, too. And she was working on
ads. You know, part of her job is to
sort of pitch to advertisers what this
new model is and explain it to them.
She's banging her head against the wall.
It's so hard to do. And so, she calls up
her mentor, Larry Summers, who had
previously been the US Treasury
Secretary and Cheryl had been his chief
of staff there. She's like, "Larry, I'm
having a hard time explaining this to
advertisers. you know how this model
works, the second price auction. It's
weird. And Larry's like, "Oh, this is
what's called a victory second bid
auction. There's a lot of economic
literature about this. This is the
optimal way to do auctions and this is
actually how the Federal Reserve sells
its Treasury bonds. You should just tell
advertisers that."
So, she does it. You know, I don't think
it sinks in right away, but eventually
advertisers get the message.
That's funny. I do know this was very
painful for Google to do to transition
all their advertisers over to this new
model. They actually called it project
sunset where they had to sunset them off
the old model, bring them on to the new
pricing. Even though it was better for
everyone, it's miserable along the way.
I have a funny kod for you to the whole
overure thing. Great. Go for it. So, I
think it is correct that Google and
particularly Salar led the charge on the
insight that click-through rate is
really important and factoring it back
in is relevant. Overure did also figure
it out earlier. The problem was that
after the team implemented it,
advertisers, as you would imagine, no
longer knew how much to bid. And
Overture's whole thing was we have this
transparent thing on the page where we
show the prices and whenever you load up
a page now the prices were out of order
and you're like well what am I supposed
to get to bid to get the top spot and
also like it makes it plain and clear
you guys are supposed to be transparent
now you're this like confusing black
box. Overture did not take the pain of
transitioning over to this new model and
they just abandoned it and said, "Uh,
we're not going to mess with this
click-through rate thing," which ended
up being crucially important to the
model. This also highlights something
that we would be remiss not to say as
well. The technical infrastructure to
dynamically execute second bid auctions
every single time a user is making a
search query was incredible, especially
at Google scale. in 2001 with the
technology available then. Yes. Yeah. I
totally believe that Overture did try to
implement it had the same idea and also
that Overture had really good technology
too. Like I I think that is true. But
again back to Google's infrastructure
and the commodity hardware and the
scaling out data centers and the
distributed file system and distributed
computing to really scale this you
needed special infrastructure that only
they had. So, okay, we're talking about
the pain of transitioning the Google ad
model and ultimately the whole business
over to this new beautiful AdWords model
and and how hard that was to put some
numbers on it. So, in 2001, the year
that the Yahoo deal saved the company,
Google for the year ultimately did $86
million in revenue that year and $10
million in profit. So, turned profitable
in 2001. like great numbers by any
metric for a startup and especially in
the middle of the dot winter, but almost
all of that revenue was the combination
of these portal deals and the old ad
system that was in place. So, Project
Sunset and transitioning over to the new
ad system put a large portion of that
revenue at risk. Oh, yeah. It was not
necessarily an easy decision. I mean, it
was an easy decision because like the
performance was so clearly better and
like eventually economic incentives
would kick in, but it was still a little
tenuous there in Google land for a
while. The other thing that's happening
at this exact same time is Eric Schmidt
arrives and discovers that 50% of
Google's searches are outside the US,
but they have no international ad sales.
There's no international business. So he
almost jokingly tells Omid, "Just go get
on a plane. Go to the airport Monday
morning and I'll call you and tell you
what market to where to buy a ticket to
and we'll just kind of go from there or
just pick a country and we'll, you know,
figure it out." They kind of build
basically these little startup teams in
a bunch of different geographies that
kind of act as their own company selling
Google ads on the new system. But it
basically works year one because OMID
spent the whole year on the plane. 18%
of revenue is now international. 2002 it
grew to 22%. 2003 it grew to 29%. Today
it's half of Google's business. And they
even had a business in China for a long
time until famously they got into a
fight with China that started in when
was that 2002 and 03 04 something like
that. Yeah. Eventually Google finally
just withdrew and rather than censoring
results in 2010. But basically
everywhere that is not China, starting
in 2001 with Schmidt being like, "We
need an international business," they
grew themselves a just fine
international business. Yep. Yep. Yep.
So 2002 is this year of transition to
AdWords for the company. So spoiler
alert, it worked. In 2002, the company
did $440
million of revenue. So up like, you
know, whatever that is, five, sixx from
the 86 they did the year before while
transitioning all of that revenue to the
new model. And when I say all of that
revenue, I really do mean all of it
because a lot of that 86 million,
remember, was the the the portal
partnership deals. By midway through
2002,
Google's realizing that paid search and
Adwords is working so well, we should
stop having portals pay us for organic
search. We should start paying them to
do paid search on their sites and share
the ad revenue. And that leads to the
landmark summer 2002
deal with AOL. Oh yes. But before we
tell that story, now is a great time to
thank one of our favorite companies,
Verscell. Verscell is such an awesome
company. Over the past few years, they
become the infrastructure backbone that
powers modern web development and now
the AI wave, too. If you visited a fast,
responsive website lately or used a
slick AI native app with agents and
hyperpersonalized interfaces, there's a
good chance it was built and deployed on
Verscell. Yeah. And the reason for that
is that Verscell has completely
reimagined the developer experience for
the modern era. In the old world,
developers had two completely different
jobs. Write code, then wrestle with
deployment. Verscell eliminated that
second component with what they call
framework defined infrastructure that
transforms your code into live globally
distributed applications automatically.
But now Versell is enabling something
even more incredible. Shipping live code
as fast as AI generates it. So in the
past even the very best web companies
used to deploy new production code
roughly on a daily cadence. Now
companies like Door Dash and Notion are
just shipping constantly on Verscell.
And Verscell is increasingly the
platform to build full stack AI apps.
Verscell has been synonymous with
front-end development, but now they do
backend and agentic workloads as well.
Exactly. And Verscell is their own
guinea pig with this stuff, too. Their
own AI product, Vzero, has 2 and a half
million users who've generated more than
100 million messages with six app
generations every second. And Vzero runs
entirely on Verscell's platform. We did
an ACQ2 episode with Verscell CEO Guemo
back in February where we talked about
all this. It's kind of wild. So if you
want to learn more about what Verscell
can do for AI and web development at
your company, join customers like
Runway, Supreme, PayPal, Ramp,
NerdWallet, Leonardo, Zapier, and Scale
AAI. And head on over to
versel.com/acquired.
That's verel.com/acquired.
and just tell him that Ben and David
sent you. Okay, so the AOL deal and one
context setting thing just to see how
fast Google's world changed in 2002 with
the new Adwords system it going
phenomenally well as recently as late
2001 just months before there's a dinner
with Terry Seml who's the CEO of of
Yahoo kind of big media executive guy
comes in takes over is the big media CEO
and he sits down with the founder ers
and he says, "So guys, I think we're
your biggest customer, right? Like us
paying you for those organic results in
the portal deal?" And they say, "Yep."
And he says, "That's like less than $10
million that we're paying you. So you
don't have a business, do you? The
business can't be that big if we're your
biggest customer at less than $10
million." And everyone's all excited
about you. And they're like, "Uh, we're
excited about some of the things they
have in the works." and they're clearly
thinking about this new AdWords system
that they're going to launch on the
spot. He offers to buy Google for a
billion dollars. Wow. Even knowing you
aren't doing much revenue. And this is
at a time Google was so secretive preo.
I mean, no one knew other people in the
business. Terry Semble sits down. He
didn't have a real sense of their
revenue. He just knew that he was the
biggest customer. So, I think this kind
of illustrates just what an insane 12
months it was to go from being in that
position to the numbers that you just
shared on what is it 5x revenue in a
year. Yep. They more than 5xed revenue
from 2001 to 2002 from that 86 million
to 440 million in revenue. All right.
So, they're feeling real good about this
and so they decide to go to AOL, the big
source of traffic. I mean, AOL has 34
million users at this point. It's funny
imagining this recently, AOL was still a
big and important company, but if they
could figure out how to be the search
results provider and more importantly
the ad provider for AOL, that is a
potentially company-making event. Yes. I
mean, hell, 2002,
I was probably just transitioning from
using AOL as my way to access the
internet as a senior in high school. I
think we had maybe just gotten broadband
like that year, maybe the year before.
Funny how sometimes things feel like a
lifetime ago and sometimes they feel
like just yesterday. Right. Right. So,
yeah. Okay. Summer 2002,
the transition to the new AdWords model
is blowing the doors off. Google goes to
AOL, which by the way, Yahoo sees this
and they come back and say, "How about
three billion?"
I had heard about that three billion
number. Google comes back and says, "How
about five billion?" And of course, no
deal gets done. And this would be the
last time that they seriously try to
acquire the company. Yeah. But then
Yahoo would buy Overture.
But as I pointed out a minute ago, when
Yahoo bought Overture for $1.6 billion,
that was a huge portion of Yahoo's
market cap. If they had actually done
the $5 billion
price that the Google founders floated
at them, it would have been reverse
takeover. It would have been Google
taking over Yahoo. Oh, that's a good
point. In fact, Google throwing out 5
million is almost a farce. It's like,
how about we buy you? It's like it's a
counter offering. Yeah, we'll we'll buy
you. That's so funny. So, this AOL deal.
The current state of things is that the
34 million AOL users, their search
experience is powered by Inktomy on the
organic side since 1999, so the last 3
years, and Overture for the last two
years. It's sort of a bake off of do we
want those two or do we want just one to
take over all of it since Google seems
to have kind of the whole package. Now,
Google wins the deal. Here's the shape
of the deal. And then we can kind of
talk about the philosophy behind it, but
it's worth
all
UI. So Google can sign them up or AOL
can say, "Hey advertiser, I know we have
a long-standing relationship. You can
buy ads on our properties other than
search, but for search, here's the URL
you go to to place your order with
Google." M okay. Go through the rest of
the deal points, but this is huge. That
is huge. Google will then share back 85
cents on the dollar to AOL for all of
that revenue. AOL wants two things in
exchange for turning over their entire
business in the search advertising world
to Google. One is we want warrant
coverage. So what they end up getting
granted is the option to buy 7.4 4
million shares of Google at $3 per
share. So a total of a $22 million
investment. They get that as part of the
deal. Two is a $100 million revenue
guarantee. Yep. We want to make sure
that hey, even if this whole thing falls
apart, you're going to pay us at least
$und00 million and hopefully more if
these ads perform well and we're getting
85%. So, here's the crazy thing. Google
doesn't have $100 million. When they're
negotiating this deal in May of 2002,
it's like just starting to work. Yeah.
So, Sergey Brin has a quote. He says,
"We could have gone bankrupt." This is
quite literally Google betting the
company. And the way to kind of think
about it is financial leverage. They
took on a fixed dollar obligation with
that revenue guaranteed AOL. So if
there's upside to Google, it would have
been a huge huge win. But if there's
downside in their business of serving,
yeah, if they couldn't make it work on
AOL, right? They obviously have very
high confidence that it would. But if
something happens and they're like, oh
shoot, we actually can't sell these
things at the rates that we thought, it
would have gone from like, oh shucks,
bummer, to now that we've signed this
deal, we're bankrupt. Yeah, this was a
really, really contentious decision. And
I think it ultimately came down to Larry
and Sergey pushing for this. You are
absolutely right. There's a great quote
in Ken Alleta's book about this where
Omid says, "You're betting the company
if you do that." And Larry Page
responds, "We should be able to monetize
the pages. If not, we deserve to go out
of business."
That's great. So, yeah, those are the
deal terms, but that first one of
advertisers are going to use Google's
system. This is why it's worth betting
the company. This is when Google
discovered what we talked about on our
Meta episode when Bos Andrew Bosworth
the CTO had the insight that more ads
equals better ads and then argued to
Zuck and Cheryl like then we need to
show more ads in feeds and then they'll
get better. The more ad inventory you
have in your system, if you're serving
them dynamically based on a ranking and
targeting them, you want to have as much
inventory as possible to give you as
many candidates to choose the best ad to
serve. And so onboarding all of AOL's
search ad inventory into Google's system
was hugely strategically valuable. Yeah,
it's a market liquidity thing. Yes,
exactly. Basically, the more volume you
have in your market, the more deeply
traded the market, the more likely you
are to have an ad that has perfect
product market fit with the query. Yes.
If you have a thin pool of advertisers,
and several folks I talked to at Google
made this point to me that if Google had
come out of the gates with the AdWords
business model in all of its glory that
it ultimately became, it would have been
very hard to bootstrap from a cold start
because you would have had this
inventory problem. you wouldn't have
been able to deliver the magical high
quality ad experience because you would
have had a very thin inventory of
advertisers. You almost had to bootstrap
it up how they did and then onboard this
other supply into the marketplace to get
deep liquidity. It's funny. I just want
to pause for one second. When you say
magical, there's nothing magical about
search ads, but I think you're right
that they're like the least offensive.
They're the most likely to be what I'm
looking for without giving me any
delight whatsoever. Sorry, I meant
magical from an economic sense. It is
the most magical economic transaction I
think ever known to man. Right. I mean,
for an advertiser, you are reaching the
exact right person at the exact right
time when they have the most intent
possible to find your service. It is
actually a pretty magical economic
lever. Well, to your point at the
beginning of the episode that Google
with this business model makes more
profits than any other company. Yeah.
Airgo logically it's the most magical
business model ever discovered. Right.
So the ink to me comment on this. They
commented to the Wall Street Journal on
AOL's decision. They'll learn over time
that Google takes your users. It doesn't
help you build your property.
which wasn't wrong. I mean, how many
people use any portal today versus how
many people use Google directly today?
So, how did this actually go? They made
this huge bet. They put $100 million on
the line. You better be really, really
sure that you can come through when
you're betting your company. Uh, it
worked. It worked. AOL made $35 million
in 2002, the first half year of the deal
alone, and then in 2003 made $200
million. Wow. Yeah. Yeah, blow through
the guarantee there. Absolutely. This
made Google a major player in the paid
listings market almost overnight and
they weren't at all before. Overture
dominated this market before. So this is
a absolute bet the company move that
couldn't have gone better and they were
taking all that inventory effectively
from Overture who was AOL's partner
before this. That's exactly right. This
is also where Cheryl Sandberg really
makes her mark. She joined David as you
mentioned sometime in the last year
right around when Eric Schmidt joined or
right after that and she was looking for
the right job to do. She's sort of
poking around the company. I think she's
a business unit manager or something
like that but Google didn't really have
business units. And so OMI sits down
with her and says you're looking for a
big job, right? And she says yes. And he
said we have this huge AOL deal that we
just signed. We have a ton of new
advertisers in a bunch of categories
that we have no idea how to service. We
need like an army of people to handle
these thousands of new advertisers and
they have to be smart and they have to
be adaptable because we have no systems
built for this yet. And then over time
they're going to have to figure out how
to scale themselves so that we're not
constantly hiring more people. They need
to feed ideas into our technology
organizations to make it so that we get
more leverage off of the people that we
hire. and she basically hired all these
great people, built out the entire
AdWords sales function to service this
monster AOL deal. That was what she did
at Google before going and becoming COO
of Facebook. We'll talk about that on
the next Google episode here. Yes. This
also I think as Google's digesting this
deal and realizing the huge strategic
value of it, this really I think gives
them license to then go play offense on
traffic acquisition everywhere. Like
basically the light bulb now goes off of
if we can have Google search paid and
organic be part of the user experience
anywhere on the internet. We should do
everything possible to do that because
it will build our liquidity pool and our
business and we will just monetize the
internet. Oh boy, will it ever. David,
you want to do distribution? Do you want
to go there right now? Oh yeah, let's go
there. Great. All right. I've been
chomping at the bit. So, we're going to
talk about all the crazy stuff they did
for distribution.
But before that, it's worth a discussion
of the business model of search. We've
been talking about it all episode, but
there's a very particular unique
characteristic that once you realize it,
it completely changes how you should
think about distribution. So, search is
a winner take all market. And not just
because it's large and consumerf facing
and it's horizontal across industries.
There's something more to it than that,
a second layer. So, they've got all the
traditional economies of scale that you
would expect it. If you make a thousand
of a widget, you get cheaper pricing
than if you make 10 of that widget. So
just like everyone else, they amortize
the fixed costs of their infrastructure
and their employees and they have a
better infrastructure model as we were
talking about earlier, etc., etc.
Exactly. But there's this crazy thing
that happens with Google where at scale,
not only do their costs decrease on a
unit basis, their revenue actually
increases per unit. So here's what I
mean by that. When you have more biders
on every keyword, you have better price
discovery in that little market and the
winning bid is a higher price than it
would be if they had less biders. Ah,
this is another reason why you want a
deeper market liquidity pool. Yes. The
second thing too is you have biders on
keywords that are less common. So let's
say you've just got the 100 biggest
advertisers in the world. You only get
to monetize some of your searches. But
if you've got a big long tale of
advertisers or just a lot of
advertisers, then you get to advertise
more of your searches. So it's more
likely that any given search results in
revenue. So having marketplace liquidity
means you always generate the most
revenue per search versus other smaller
search engines. So it's not just that
unit costs go down, it's that as they
scale, their revenue per search actually
goes up due to the auction system. Um,
yeah, there's a third statement that you
need to add to, you know, Bos's insight
from the Facebook days of more ads
equals better ads. It's more ads equals
better ads equals better business.
Absolutely. I mean, it is crazy that
there's this you make more money per
search the bigger you scale. Yeah. In
this auction-based marketplace system,
it's increasing returns to scale.
Exactly. So then keep following the
logic tree. So because each search is
worth more, well each user is worth more
over their lifetime, which means you can
pay more than other search engines can
to acquire a new user. And once you
realize this and you get a little bit
ahead, which this is where Google is
right now in history in that 2002 era, a
little bit ahead, you can start pressing
your advantage. And once you start doing
that, it's really hard for anyone to
catch up. So the cycle is get
distribution. And we haven't yet talked
about how, but somehow we've talked
about it a little bit in the portal
deals, which drives volume of searches.
More searches drives keyword bids.
Keyword bids drive up price in auctions.
The price creates more revenue for
Google. More revenue for Google means
they can pay more for distribution. The
virtuous cycle obviously goes on. So the
obvious lesson, do not just sit back and
let organic growth do its thing. even
though they've got great organic growth
and the best brand in the world and here
in 2001 2002 you want to be aggressive
and gobble up this market as fast as you
can because someone else is going to
have this insight too. Mhm. So then the
tactics what do you do? One pay massive
revenue share to your distribution
partners in some cases up to 100% of the
revenues generated. We'll talk about who
the distribution partners are in a
second, but even earlier we heard with
that uh AOL deal, they were willing to
give AOL 85%. That's a huge split. Yep.
Yes. So, with some partners, they were
incredibly aggressive. They was like,
"We're we're going to give you all the
revenue for a while just to get you on."
Yes. Exactly. If Google monetizes each
search the most, then their rev share to
distributors are going to be better than
anyone else. Let's say they give away
the same percentage as other people. Oh,
we're only giving away 70%. Well, that's
more than someone else's 70%. So, you
know, press that advantage, go 100%. I
even heard one example where they gave
more than 100%. Where they they realize
like the payback on this is just so this
property is so valuable to get this
distribution. Yes. Eventually, it just
doesn't make economic sense for a
competitor to match your pricing. They
literally will run out of money to try
to spend the way that you can spend
because your monetization per user is so
high. So realizing this is kind of a
secret weapon. This is also where being
private was nice. Some of the other
search engines were public by this point
and so they were reporting very
consistent metrics that they wanted to
continue reporting. Google could
irrationally do things like eh we're
going to overpay for distribution in
this case and they could potentially
risk having a worse quarter. Ultimately,
Google discovered this property and they
had a belief that no one else had, which
is search is going to be really, really
big. Not like a billion dollars big or
10 billion big. Search is currently half
a trillion dollar annual revenue market.
This is a market worth betting
everything on. and they had the stomach
to invest very very very heavily where
others kind of thought like geez is the
final payoff gonna actually be worth
investing into this market and Google
thought it's literally worth any amount
of money that we could invest in this
especially in being first and being
biggest. So we've been talking so far
about distribution deals in terms of
these you know search deals with
portals. tell us about some of the other
crazy stuff they end up doing because
once you realize this, the game just
becomes get users and advertisers at all
costs. That's exactly right. So,
currently people need to know how to
type in google.com.
That sucks. It would be really nice if
you could get users without having to
like hear that from a friend and load up
a web page to start searching and like
hopefully you bookmark it. You don't own
a browser. So, how do you get a Google
search box to actually appear in the
browser instead of on google.com? Which,
by the way, Microsoft owns the browser
right now. And if there's anybody you
need to be afraid about figuring out
this secret, it's Microsoft. And
Microsoft definitely did figure out this
secret. And just to be a little more
specific on that, Google was already
going and starting to pull away from the
rest of the market. So, it would have
taken a boatload of money to try and
compete with Google even a year or two
into this, which almost no one except
Microsoft has. And then, spoiler alert
for part two, who would a few years
later try to spend a boatload of money
to compete with Google? Microsoft. Yes.
Okay. So, Microsoft's got Internet
Explorer. Google doesn't have a browser.
What do you do? It's December of 2000.
We are not talking Chrome territory
here. Google Toolbar, baby. Google
Toolbar.
Man, when this came up in the research,
it was like the biggest blast from the
past of both. Man, I love that thing.
Man, I had not thought about that in
about 15 years. And holy crap, everybody
thought this was just this gift that
Google, the benevolent Google gods,
bestowed upon the internet ecosystem. No
way. It was a hugely strategic business
model piece for them. So, here's how it
worked. They shipped it super early in
December of 2000. This is like 2 and a
half years after the company was founded
before they've figured out AdWords v2.
They had just launched AdWords v1. So,
it's both the sort of offense we're
talking about here of go be aggressive,
get users, but also defense. Google's
paranoid about Microsoft entering and
using Internet Explorer as a weapon. If
Microsoft owns the browser, they can
direct the traffic wherever they want.
So once toolbar is installed by a user
and maybe we should for younger people
explain what tool bars are. What Google
toolbar is. Yeah. What toolbars are it
was a plugin the equivalent of a a
browser extension that would basically
create a bar underneath your bookmarks
bar or I don't know if bookmarks bars
were even a thing yet. Kind of where the
books mark bar is. Yeah. At the top of
the window. Yes. and it had a little
Google search box in it along with some
other functionality and you could just
search right from the toolbar without
having to go to the website. Right
nowadays, every modern browser you just
search from the bar at the top of the
browser. There used to be two different
things. There was a URL bar and first
that's all there was and then eventually
they put in a search field inspired by
the Google toolbar. So here's the
economics on how it all works. Once
Google Toolbar was installed, a user
averaged seven times the number of
searches,
obviously, which makes them seven times
more valuable, which means you could pay
a lot of money to get someone to install
it. Yes. So, how did they pay money to
get users to install the Google Toolbar?
Because they weren't paying users. The
average annual revenue generated by a
Google user was $2. But with toolbar it
was 10 plus dollars even if you're being
conservative. So that difference that
somewhere of you know eight bucks a user
call it is your budget to play with and
estimates are that Google ended up
spending on average way less than this
for a Google toolbar install. But you
can understand the amount of lift that
they get from a Google toolbar when you
understand wow it's worth $8 more per
user in this year. And by the way,
average revenue per user, Arpoo, is
skyrocketing. It's growing very quickly.
So this $8 is just this year's going to
become $20, $50, $100. Yeah. So Google
just paid everyone that they possibly
could to bundle Google Toolbar with
their installer of an application. This
includes Adobe. You downloading an Adobe
app. Hey, congratulations. You have
Google Toolbar. You don't know it, but
Google just paid Adobe a bunch of money.
Real networks, same thing. Windzip, same
thing. They were hyperaggressive. And
just to be really clear about what's
happening here, when users are
downloading programs, what apps used to
be called, to run on their computers,
Google is paying the maker of that
program to include a Trojan horse
payload of the Google toolbar, which
will then become a Trojan horse that
lives in your internet browser in
Internet Explorer, and Google will make
a lot more money from you. So the most
horrible way to describe this is that
it's adwear, it's spyw wear, it's a
Trojan, but users loved it. I love the
Google toolbar. Totally. But the
technique itself, are you going to get
into pop-up blocking? No. Lay it on me.
Oh, well, so as they were building the
toolbar and thinking about like, okay, a
users are going to love this because
users love Google and being able to
access search, you know, that's value
prop in and of itself for this thing,
but popup ads were a problem on the
internet at this point in time. And one
of the most popular plugins for web
browsers were pop-up blockers. And so
Google decided, well, hell, why don't we
make the Google toolbar also a pop-up
blocker? Just one more incentive to
install it and become a sticky Google
user. Yes, genius. They even did a deal
with Dell directly to make sure that
when new PCs shipped with Windows, they
shipped with Google Toolbar
pre-installed on Internet Explorer.
Amazing. They famously did a deal to
become the default search engine in
Firefox just as it was becoming popular,
which served as Mozilla's main revenue
source for decades. And this is a great
one that'll be real close to home.
David, you remember the uh Google Earth
acquisition? Oh, yes, I do. Classic
acquired episode. So, Google's an
ad-based business. They buy Earth.
There's conversation in Google. How do
we put ads inside Google Earth? Well,
instead of doing that, they realized
that Google Earth is going viral. People
are downloading this thing like crazy
because it's really cool to just play
with a globe on your And the original
Google Earth was a program that ran on
your computer. It wasn't like baked into
Google Maps, the web app. Yep. And
Google Maps was like very lame compared
to Google Earth. They did very different
functions. Maps was clearly for driving
directions. Earth was, "Oh my god, I can
zoom in on my house and I can it's all
3D. It's super cool." They just bundled
Google Toolbar with the installs of
Google Earth. And then it more than paid
for itself. We don't need to do ads. Way
more than paid for itself. Yeah, it's
crazy. No need to put ads in Google
Earth. It's so crazy. In the mid200s,
Arpoo would eventually grow $10, $20,
$30, and always a Google toolbar user
was stickier than a non-toolar user. And
so, they just had more and more and more
budget to play with in acquiring users.
And not to spoil too much, but obviously
this still plays out all the way to the
much debated Apple Safari deal today and
the tens of billions of dollars that
Google still pays to Apple in traffic
acquisition costs. Yep.
So the takeaway here is yes, they had
the best product and yes, it was fast
and yes, it was the best technically
competent and yes, they had this amazing
culture, but everyone kind of forgets
about the fact that they were so
aggressive in distribution deals. They
didn't just let people magically find
their way to Google. Yeah. And it was
all so strategic. As I've been talking
to people over the last month about
making this episode, talking to friends,
think about how to position it. I've
been like, "This first Google episode
feels like when we made the Costco
episode. It's the same beautiful ballet
where every piece of the Google business
model works together and reinforces the
other pieces and in concert it creates
the best business model of all time."
Yep. And it's funny, Toolbar happened to
be the one that worked, but it wasn't
the only thing they tried. They tried so
many desktop applications. They even had
one called Google Desktop that would
search your desktop and then incorporate
those results privately into your web
searches. The original Google Enterprise
Search application reincarnated as
Google Desktop. But that's basically the
strategy for all these applications and
clients is how do we make you a more
sticky Google user? So, do you know the
final chapter of this story of in 2004,
a new PM is hired by Google. They come
in and they take over this applications
client team that includes Google
Toolbar. That PM is Sundar Pachchai.
That's right. And that is all we will
talk about for Sundar on this episode,
but obviously he will come into play
much more in the future. Well, it really
highlights how important Google Toolbar
was and how secretive the company was
about this really being like the
strategic lynch pin of what they were
doing or a strategic lynch pin. So
there's one more business building story
to tell here before we get to the IPO
and the end of this episode and it's
another version of this sort of
extension of the Google business model
and that is AdSense which is Google's
kind of second big business line after
Adwords on search pages. Yep. And it's
another brilliant insight of how to
extend the strategic Google business
model. Before AdSense,
Google was limited to making money when
a search happened. That was the atomic
unit of the Google business model was a
search query, which actually doesn't
happen that often. It's a really
valuable thing when it happens because
it's high intent. But most of the time
someone loads up a page, it's a website
that is not google.com, right? You're
consuming content on the internet much
more often or for a higher share of time
than you are running queries and
searches. And queries and searches have
high intent. So they're really really
valuable. But there's all this other
time and content on the internet that
Google can't monetize.
But because of everything that they
built for page rank and organic search
and understanding what's on a page and
then serving the page as search results
and then also for the ad system for ad
targeting and ad quality and predicting
click-through rate, they realize that
well actually we don't really need a
query to happen to serve effective ads
against what a user is consuming. What
if we essentially run a version of the
same algorithms on static pages on
publishers web pages and then reverse
serve the keywords that we would have
served for a search query that would
have landed on that page.
It's absolutely brilliant. It's a little
bit different because they're matching
the ads to content instead of to intent.
It's sort of try to fit in with the
content around it. But, you know, if
you're consuming content, you likely
have some future intent around that
content or maybe even loose intent right
now. Yep. And we've got this existing
pool of advertisers in our system and
their ads. And their ads in the system.
We could literally just run the same
ads. We could run the same ads on web
pages. So in February of 2003, they have
this idea and Google is still massively
inventory constrained for serving ads.
There's way more demand from advertisers
to be serving their ads against queries
than there are query supply in the
system, so to speak. Which is why the
auction works. If you had way more
searches, then everybody would just be
bidding, you know, one and two cents on
everything all the time and winning.
Right. Right. Right. You always want to
be supply constrained as a business.
Yes.
So, legendary Google engineer Jeff Deian
builds AdSense in six weeks. The whole
system, of course, he does. They're
great stories. You know, they launch it
first on Google groups and then they
want to test it on true third-party
websites to see how this works. And as
they're testing it, what they decide to
do is, oh, we'll just buy display ad
space on these other publishers and
rather than running display ads, we'll
serve it however they need to serve it.
but will effectively serve a display ad
that is just a window into the text ads
of AdWords ads that we're serving onto
that page. I remember seeing these for
the longest time when you publisher
enabled Google AdSense. You'd get like
what looked like search results just
like three across in a banner. Exactly.
That's what AdSense was in the
beginning. And their favorite website
for testing this was the website how
stuffuffs.com
because all of the pages on how stuff
works it turned out were like high
intent highly commercializable Adwords
pages for AdWords queries like if you
reverse engineered the ad search queries
that would have run AdWords against them
they were great pages.
So Susan Wiski came in as the product
manager for this into the process and it
becomes another big business for Google
much lower margin than their own
first-party AdWords business but adds
hundreds of millions of dollars of
revenue to Google off the bat. Yeah,
I've seen different estimates from
different points in time. Sometimes that
they share 67% of revenue, sometimes
that they share 80% of revenue. But the
right way to think about it is most of
the revenue on a click in Google AdSense
actually goes to the website publisher
and Google takes the smaller part as
their spiff. Yes, that's right. Whereas
if you actually own the search results
page and you are running firstparty ads,
you get 100%. Yeah, but it's very
similar to the portal ad deals that they
were doing with AOL and others of
sharing revenue with the publisher. It's
the same model, right? Yeah, it's a
great point. It's someone else's
traffic. The net result of this, by the
way, of the AdSense launch, Google has
had a troubled dance over the years back
and forth with publishers. Are they good
for publishers? Are they bad for
publishers? What does it mean for the
news industry? Blah blah blah. Right in
this moment when they launch AdSense,
publishers, and especially small ones,
love them. I'm making content on the
internet and all I have to do is drop in
some HTML and Google just starts
depositing money in my bank account.
This is amazing. Think about this, too.
This is the precursor to the YouTube
business model for creators. Oh, wait.
You mean I get to just create content
and put it on YouTube and Google
deposits money in my account? This is
the first version of that. An ad network
running on a thing that you make is a
beautiful thing for a small business
owner. Totally. And with all the
liquidity of advertisers of Google. So
they launched this thing, you know, Jeff
codes it up at the beginning of 2003,
kind of call it end of Q1 in 2003, they
launch AdSense. By the end of the year,
so just a few months later, it's doing
over a million dollars a day in revenue.
That's crazy. It's just crazy how fast
this grew. And we're zoomed in on
AdSense right now, but you know, we're
still preipo here. The rest of the
business is still very much developing.
It's worth sort of bouncing around to a
few different parts of Google to share
some updates that kind of didn't fit
into the story arc along the way. One is
20% time is happening. People are
launching all sorts of fun side projects
and there's Google Labs, which is this
really great way that they're starting
to surface this stuff to users. Google
News comes out of this. is legitimately
someone's actual 20% time, their own
personal motivations. Actually,
particularly after September 11th,
there's this super strong hunger for
people to have a way to get rapidly
updating news on a topic. Yeah, you
couldn't get that before. You had to go
to CNN.com, right? So, Google News is
starting to really get some traction.
And speaking of disputes with
publishers, that is starting to heat up
as well. The second thing is their
organic search ranking is really
developing. what started as just page
rank plus then using the anchor text,
they're starting to use all sorts of
things later by 2007 they were using 200
different pieces of information to
determine the ranking on a query and
early on I know some of these early
signals included data that they were
actually feeding back from observing
traffic. there's this data network
effect that's starting to happen where
more people use Google and that makes
Google better a on the whole so they can
understand oh if someone keeps bouncing
off that page every time this query is
searched then clearly that thing doesn't
belong we're doing a bad job on this
query yeah yeah or B personalization
what can we learn about you from a whole
bunch of things that you've done in the
past now without spoiling too much of
the future there's not a strong reason
to be logged into Google yet
personalization only works so well, but
once Google accounts become a thing,
then that'll really take off. So, it's
worth knowing, and I really didn't know
this, page rank really is the thing that
got Google going, but that part of the
algorithm isn't really the thing that's
the main differentiable asset today. It
was just the start. And I think this is
also a major difference in mindset of
Larry and Sergey and Google versus the
other search providers. Everybody else
just said, "Oh, we've got our insight."
Like, "Okay, great. We're done." You
know, yes, we solved search. Google has
never said, "We solved search." And they
just keep investing and investing and
investing. I think a they believe search
is going to be bigger than anyone could
have realized, but b they sort of had
the insight of the exponential curve of
content on the internet is growing
faster than Google will ever be able to
sort of index it all or come up with
clever strategies to sort it all. And
it's so dynamically changing that we'll
actually never catch up. And so we need
to constantly be investing to
approximate good results because we'll
actually never have optimal results.
Yep. Totally. And then the third big
sort of thing that kept developing is
their infrastructure. They put so much
over these years into building out all
the hardware that we were talking about.
A ton of software stuff. Yeah. And that
hardware stuff shifted from we're being
really uh you know entrepreneurial shall
we say and how we use commodity hardware
cheaply to oh we're designing our own
data centers. Yep. Absolutely. And we're
designing our own file systems with GFS
or you know I think we'll talk about a
lot of it in the next episode but very
real system level software that is
pioneering. Yep. Big table map produce
etc etc. Yep. That's on top of the
clever search software that they're
writing for things like synonyms. People
don't pay that much attention to this,
but synonym matching is actually a
crucial part of getting search right. If
you're searching for cat and there's a
whole incredibly relevant page about
kittens and you don't have a good way to
understand synonyms, then you're never
going to surface it even though it might
be incredibly relevant. And Google had
all these little tricks like realizing,
oh wait, when users are searching for
cool cat pictures and then they change
cat to kitten and that happens a lot, we
can infer that that is actually a
synonym. And then we can develop our own
constantly updating synonym dictionary
in real time, which will make our search
results better. And they have a thousand
of these things. And so they're just
pushing and pushing and pushing. So
we're finishing out 2003 here. They're
effectively never capital constrained
from this point on. They can always fund
every idea that they have the business
has flipped from one that kind of
prejune of 2002ish they had to make
trade-offs. And after call it the end of
2002, there's no more trade-offs ever.
They always have the cash for every
single thing they want to do. Yes, we
talked about 2002 and the 440 million of
revenue and the 185 million of profits.
2003 that explodes to one and a half
billion in revenue and almost 350
million in operating income. What was
operating income the year before? 185
million. So went from 185 to 350 in one
year. Yep. In one year. Wow. So some of
you might be listening and be like,
"Well, wait a minute. Sounds like their
margins got a lot worse." And yeah,
depending on your accounting, it did.
You get to keep all the money from
AdWords and you only get to keep 20% of
the money from AdSense. Yep. AdSense is
the answer there. AdSense added like
half a billion dollars in 2003 at much
lower margin, but was awesome. Yeah. And
as best we can understand it, Google
AdWords stayed an 85% gross margin
business. Yep. Incredible. Okay, so that
takes us to the last chapter of our
story today in 2004, which is the I
think today thought of as famous Google
IPO and today thought of as successful
and today thought of as yes successful
IPO at the time infamous and horribly
unsuccessful
Google IPO of 2004. So, I don't think
other than Microsoft there had ever been
another company like this where there
was no good reason for Google to go
public. It was wildly profitable,
generating plenty of cash, did not need
the investment money. I assume they've
never spent their IPO proceeds. No, of
course not. They've never not been
wildly, wildly, wildly profitable. And
actually, even more so than Microsoft,
Google had a really, really good reason
not to go public, which was Microsoft.
As we alluded to, there was desperate
paranoia in the company of we can't let
Microsoft, they are the actual front
door to the internet for all of our
users through Internet Explorer, who
actually has the capital to fight us,
and they have no idea what a good
business this is. Yes, we can't let them
know how good this is. Fortunately, I
guess for the investing public and
unfortunately for Google, the jobs act
had not been passed yet. And so the 500
shareholder rule was still in effect for
companies in the US, which was that if
you crossed the threshold of having 500
distinct shareholders for your company,
you had to report your financials
publicly as if you were a public
company. You know, David, I read all
this, too. They had venture capital
backers. They had to go public. Sequoa
and Kleiner Perkins are not going to be
just sitting there on their hands like
we love being private shareholders
forever. We like dividends. Yeah. No. In
2003 in these funds that just went
through the dot crash. So most of their
other companies got wiped out. And it's
not like they're the venture capital
funds of today that come up with all
these clever strategies to look like
more permanent vehicles and offer
liquidity. These were closedend freaking
funds that need to get their money out.
Well, I think the question is did Larry
and Sergey care about that? Whether they
did or didn't, the 500 shareholder rule
was a forcing function, but obviously
the VCs, but to your point, I guess the
VCs didn't control the board. Larry and
Sergey controlled the company. Yeah,
exactly. Just like Bill and Paul and
Microsoft, it was extremely rare that
because Google never needed to raise VC
money after the series A, Larry and
Sergey together with the employees in
the option pool, you controlled a
majority of the votes in the company.
Hm. Meta, Google, Microsoft. There's
something correlated between founder
control and incredibly good capital
efficiency in a business. Interesting.
Regardless, this is all academic because
truly the 500 shareholder rule would
have required them to disclose their
financials anyway. So, like might as
well go public and make the VCs happy, I
guess. And employees, too. There was
clearly pent up employee demand and
there wasn't the same kind of liquidity
markets that there is today. David, put
four underlines under that. This IPO
made half of the 2,000 people who worked
at Google millionaires. Yes. Lot of
interested for this thing to go public.
Yes. So, as we get to end of 2003,
beginning of 2004, they know they're
going to cross the threshold during
2004. They're going to have to go
public. They start interviewing
investment banks. and Larry and Sergey,
you know, they really don't want to do
this. They don't like anything about the
process. They don't like the IPO pops.
They don't like how much money the banks
make, etc., etc., etc. So, they're
interviewing banks. And we should say
this IPO pop thing, it sounds good,
right? It's like a phrase that the
investment banking community invented to
make it sound like a good thing. A pop
is a bad thing for existing
shareholders. It means that in the IPO
you incorrectly priced at too low and
then within one day upside that should
have or really like is yours because it
happened in all the intrinsic value was
built over these years goes to the
people who had access to buy your IPO
shares the investment bank's clients and
then they get this nice little pop on
day one and you were mispriced. That is
the problem that a lot of people try to
solve for in different ways. Yes. So
during the IPO process, they learn from
Bill Hamrich of WR Hamchrich, a boutique
investment bank in San Francisco, who
really doesn't have the same incentives
that the big banks in New York have with
their clients, that actually there is an
alternative way to price your IPO,
something called a Dutch auction IPO
process, which is this arcane thing that
been done before. How do you do good
price discovery? Well, the optimal way
to do this is a reverse auction where
you start the bidding high and you come
down in price incrementally
until you reach a clearing price where
the entire offering size is spoken for
with bids at that price. And you can
imagine just how much this appeals to
Larry and Sergey and Google. Oh my god,
it sounds perfect. They're like, "This
is like the whole business. This is what
we do anyway. This is delightful."
There's this legend that Eric Smith
talks about of they also they got a
letter from a little old lady that uh
hearing that Google was about to go
public and really hoping she could get
it and that the small retail investor
would have access to and that pulled at
their heartstrings and I'm sure that's
true too. But you can see why this
appeals in a vacuum. This sounds perfect
and like everyone should do it. Yes. And
theoretically this is also like kind of
what the investment banker what
algorithm are they actually running? It
should be something like this, right?
They're meeting with clients. They're
picking up the phone. Are you in at this
price? Are you in how much would you
want at that price? Like you kind of
should be running this algorithm in a
loose human way anyway. Yes. Now, so
they're worried about pricing and
they're worried about the IPO mechanism.
They're also really worried about losing
control because once they go public,
even though they have control of the
company now as a private company, the
employee shares are sort of captive.
People are going to start selling. Now,
all of a sudden, the public markets are
going to control a lot more of the
company. there's risk that Larry and
Sergey might collectively lose control
of the company here. So, they do a thing
that no one else in the technology
industry does, and Google has been
swearing up and down that they're not a
media company. And then they look to the
media companies and they go, "Wait a
minute." when the media companies need
to separate editorial control and have
sort of family stewardship of editorial
control, but they want to let the
shareholders come in and they don't want
the business to be able to affect
editorial too much. They've got this
great dual class structure or a tech
company. Yes. where the families of the
New York Times company or Dow Jones back
then or basically all the major
newspaper companies, the original family
owners had super voting shares that
ensured that collectively the family
would retain majority voting control
over the company even if they lost
economic control. So Larry and Sergey
decide, oh great, we're going to do a
dual class share structure for Google,
too. Which today is super common. Yes.
But Google started it. Google was the
first tech company to do this. I mean,
today it's it's everybody. It's, you
know, Facebook Meta, Alibaba, Shopify,
Spotify, Coinbase, Airbnb, Zoom, Data
Dog. Every major IPO since Google, every
major tech IPO has had this. Famously,
Snapchat even pushed the envelope so
far. When they IPO, the public shares
have no votes. So, it's not even just
super voting. It's like, oh, you public,
you you get no votes whatsoever. That's
like being a Green Bay Packers
shareholder. Yeah, exactly. Google
pioneered all of this, which I think is
why in retrospect this IPO is viewed as
a famous success. Okay, so they do the
Dutch auction. In practice, it does not
go well.
But why? This is the so the numbers on
this are pretty crazy. They are
initially floating in the Dutch auction
using the software. And by the way,
Google software engineers wrote the
software. I know. Amazing. Isn't this
crazy? And I don't think it's like
Google owned. I think they were
collaborating with the investment bank.
So the it's like this weird joint
partnership that they're doing where
it's Google engineers, but it's this
investment bank running the process. And
they're trying to figure out where in
the range between $108 a share and $135
a share should we price? Will it be
fully subscribed? Well, the actual price
where they end up filling the order is
at $85 a share. Yep. which gives Google
a $23 billion market cap at IPO and they
raise $1.7 billion. You know, this is
like great, right? It's a $1.7 billion
raise, $23 billion market cap. That
looks like an astronomically high
multiple that the company's been given.
So, you should walk away and say they
really maximized value there. And they
probably were just wrong in that initial
range that they were looking for. $108 a
share at 135 and it only priced at 85.
Well, trust the mechanism. I guess it's
only actually worth $85 a share. Nope.
Pops to 100 bucks on closing of trading
the very same day. 18% bop day one. Then
by the end of the very next year, 16
months later, it is almost a 5x. Yeah,
this thing was not at all priced
correctly. So there's a reason why when
you look at the legacy of the Google
IPO, dual class share structure, great
idea. Everybody does it. Dutch auction
IPO, not a great idea. Nobody has done
it since. It doubled within the first
few months. Yeah. I mean, it's great PR,
right? The stocks doing well. People
think high of your company. That's good
for all sorts of reasons. But this did
absolutely zero for making sure that the
company doesn't leave money on the
table. Yep. So funny. It's all kind of a
footnote of history anyway because know
what's a few percentage points between
friends when the company would go to
over$2 trillion dollars today as we are
recording this or roughly a h 100redx
the market cap when it IPOed and David
you're not counting dividends not
counting dividends right of course if
you reinvested dividends you'd make
significantly more than uh 100x since
IPO well after our Steve Bomber
interview never going to not count
dividends again but to preview a little
bit the rest of the series. Google's a
2.1 call it trillion dollar market cap
company today. Roughly 100x since the
IPO. Amazingly, I'm going to ask, do you
know? I know you know what Google
Alphabet's price to earnings ratio is
right now. Oo, baby, I do know because I
was just looking this up. It is kind of
an all-time low. 20
20 earnings 6x revenue. So compare that
to its peer companies. Amazon's PE is
35. Microsoft is 37. Nvidia is 46. Apple
is 30. And Meta is 27. And Google
Alphabet is down at 20. And it's not
like Alphabet's not growing revenue.
They're growing revenue just as fast, if
not faster, than all of those companies
except Nvidia. Something is going on
here. This price sure seems to reflect
that even though revenue is growing
nicely and margins are quite high,
somebody and that somebody is Mr. Market
thinks the future is a lot bleeer than
they do for those other companies. Never
mind that Google invented AI and
published the transformer paper. We will
get to all and all that. We will get to
all that. No spoilers. Okay, no
spoilers. But okay, that's where we're
going to leave Google for part one. But
one more little little start of a story
to tease you with for part two next
time. So the same month in April of 2004
when Google files its S1 for its IPO,
Google does a unexpected product launch
on April Fool's Day, which really was
not a good idea because Google had a
history of fake April Fool's joke
announcements. But if you have one that
kind of sounds ridiculous, don't launch
it on April Fool's Day because people
will think it's a joke. Because the
product they launch actually sounds way
too good to be true.
Webbased
email
from Google with one gigabyte of free
storage for every single user. Now, to
put that in context, Yahoo and Hotmail,
Yahoo Mail and Hotmail at the time had
like 2 megabytes of free storage per
user. I think it was 20x the next best
is the stat that I read on Gmail. Yeah.
And it comes with Google search baked in
across all of your emails and it's
entirely web- based. Runs in your
browser anytime, anywhere. It's like the
greatest
April Fool's gift to, you know, internet
users everywhere that Google could
provide here. So, the question though is
why did they do this knowing what we now
know about Google? David, wouldn't it be
great if there was a reason, like a
really compelling reason, for someone to
be logged into Google?
And wouldn't it be great if we could
just attach more things to a user's life
that could be entry points to Google
search and the greatest business of all
time, search ads? What if, then? What
if? Okay, David, we're gonna tell the
whole Gmail story as a part of chapter
two, but I do have to give you one thing
that is specific to this episode. Go for
it. So, the engineer who started Gmail,
Paul Bukite, now of course a partner at
Y Combinator and actually with Brett
Taylor, started Friend. That's right.
Paul Bukite is awesome. and recently
launched a new venture fund and actually
the original coiner of the term don't be
evil at Google. That's right. So, he's
working on Gmail. It's very early. It's
like 2001. He's been working on this
thing for two and a half, three years
before it launches. So, we're at the
very beginning of it in his 20% time,
right? It's a 20% project. And it starts
as I'm going to look in your Unix
directory at your mail and I'm just
going to treat that like the web just
the same way that we treat web pages.
And so I'm just going to take a search
box and I'm going to point it at your
mail folder and I'm going to let you
search. That's it. That's like the only
functionality of what would become
Gmail. So the search bar is actually the
first feature of Gmail and everything
else came later. And as he's playing
around with this, he has this idea.
Well, if our core business is indexing
organic results and showing some ads,
maybe in addition to indexing and
searching this organic results out of
your mail folder, I should just go grab
ads from our ad database and just kind
of display them around and see how well
the content matches. He's showing this
off internally.
Larry and Sergey see it and they go,
"Wait, does this work on websites, too?"
And so, the thing that led to AdSense,
ah, this was the beginning of the idea
for AdSense was actually part of the
prototyping process of Gmail. Ah,
amazing. I love it. I love it. And I
love how you saved this to the end
because you knew we were going to do the
little uh teaser on Gmail. Well, you
texted me. You said, "I think we should
do a little Gmail foreshadow." in the uh
great yes great great great great so
thank you to uh Paul Bukite for sharing
the story with us amazing all right
bringing it home that is the building of
Google search business let's bring this
one home yeah so David this chapter this
episode definitely feels like the
building of the castle yeah and maybe
next episode is going to be the uh the
building of the city around it the state
around it the nation state around it
yeah and depending on your metaphor Or
is it a, you know, an entire property, a
platform that they're building around
it? A city? Is it a moat? Is it a Yeah,
but it's definitely uh This one is
building the castle. We'll have to see.
All right, let's go into playbook for
part one. Ben, what do you got? The way
that I framed playbook for this one is I
tried to just itemize the bullet points
of why did Google work? And as I think
through them, if I had to sort of lay
them out to someone, starts with the
best original algorithm insight. They
had the best organic relevance out
there, which created the best results in
order, fast, delightful, clean, simple
UX. And they were truly dedicated to
organic search. I mean, the aversion to
paid inclusion for as long as they were
served them very well. So this amazing
original algorithm for organic search is
one. two, best execution of the search
advertising model. I mean, once you get
all those puzzle pieces in place, the
auction, the switch to cost per click,
factoring in relevance, you know, with
click-through rate, it really is this
truly beautiful system. Advertisers are
incentivized to make their ads more
relevant and only bid on the most
relevant keywords because it means they
don't have to pay as much. It's the best
ads to the right users at the right
time. And to your point, David, it
maximizes, it is literally the algorithm
to maximize Google's expected value. It
is like a harmonious system that they
developed. Three, clever infrastructure
advantages. They just invented stuff and
they thought about problems differently
and they reasoned from first principles.
Four, they hired the best people truly
only world-class people for a very long
time. And because when the.com crash
happened, they could basically get
anybody that they wanted there in the
second half of this episode. Paul Bukite
had a great quote when I was talking
with him. I don't even think I realized
it at the time that it was truly just
the best people in the industry working
around him. So that's four. Five,
culture. A culture of thinking insanely
big, mostly by inexperienced, untainted
people that helps you with creativity,
that helps you come up with new ideas.
It was like the naivee of kids on a
college campus who are dreaming matched
with the brain power of the very best
PhDs. And this hardcore belief that
whatever our big ideas are, we always
have to think with scale. Every little
implementation detail has to be as this
scales, will this work or do we need to
rearchitect the system is very
impressive. So culture, which includes
power law dynamics, by the way, being
willing to make big bold bets because
they could be these multi-billion dollar
payoffs. That's five. Six, the
self-reinforcing data network effects
once it takes off. I think that is
underappreciated about Google. A lot of
people say, "Oh, the algorithm." But
like the algorithm is so dependent on
all the data that is generated. And then
lastly, a mission that has stood the
test of time. Organize the world's
information. It's not too broad. It's
not too narrow. It feels altruistic, but
of course, the business behind it is
actually the best business of all time.
Yep. I would add on to the second to
last one you had there, the data network
effects. It also is the flywheel effect
of liquidity in the marketplace of users
and queries and advertisers. Yeah.
Everything that we just talked about
like once Google had that realization of
oh our business gets better the more
users and advertisers we have and thus
we should be willing to spend basically
anything to increase those two pools.
This is my quintessence. Oh, okay. I'm
stealing your quintessence. I love it. I
feel like this is the most unique
insight of this episode is wo, these are
economies of scale that don't just
reduce your cost as you get bigger, but
it increases your revenue as you get
bigger. Yeah. Okay, great. Well, I
didn't mean to steal your thunder with
quintessence. Sorry about that. We did
our quintessence earlier this episode.
Okay, great. Great. Great. All right,
give me your playbook. Great. I've got
two other sort of meta points that
jumped out to me from this episode in
addition to what you just said about the
incredible encapsulation of why Google
worked. Great. When you and I were
talking about doing this and starting
the Google series, the reason we decided
now was the right time was because of
everything going on in AI and it feels
like understanding Google has never been
more relevant. And like if we're going
to do Google unacquired, we got to start
at the beginning and understand how
Google was built because that's what we
do. And I thought, oh, this episode will
set the stage to then get to today.
telling the story though and doing the
research I was like today is exactly the
same. The parallels I had the exact same
thought between what happened between
1996 and 2002 feels like everything that
we are living through right now 2021 to
today right or even let's start with you
know the chat GPT moment put sharper I
thought this was going to be well we're
going to have to eat a lot of vegetables
to understand Google so that we can
understand where the transformer came
from to get to the real great meat and
what we can learn about AI by studying
the present. But I think by studying the
way that search played out, how did
monetization work? How did the value
chains work? How did distribution work?
How did monetization work that uniquely
enabled distribution? Where did all the
competitive dynamics come from? This is
a history doesn't repeat, but it rhymes.
And God, does this rhyme? Totally
transferable
lessons and dynamics. Yep. when you were
telling the story of GoTo and Overture
and the launch at TED and you know how
upset people were but how brilliant I
was thinking like well what would the
analogy be today like what if somebody
made a chatbot you know an LLM a model
and what it told you was just what
people paid it to tell you like people
would go crazy you know if that happened
but like yes is that worth trying should
somebody try that like well let's see
you know product design here on acquired
by David Rosen Yeah. Right. Right.
Right. Probably a bad idea, but it it
feels like such a similar Yeah. moment
that we're in. That's just what struck
me over the head doing all of this. So
like, wow, history doesn't repeat
itself, but it does rhyme. Yep. And then
the other big playbook theme I had was,
God, did Google really come of age at
exactly the right time? We talked about
this earlier, but if Larry and Sergey
had met and started working on this a
few years earlier, it would have been
Yahoo because the web was just so much
smaller. Like you didn't need a
technology-based search engine to
understand it, right? And then if they
had started a few years later, it would
have been too late. It would already
been too big. You would have needed too
much technology and power to make it
work. It was the perfect window. There
was a very narrow window to start the
Google of that era. And again, maybe
this is a subpoint of my first playbook
theme of just the parallels to today.
Yep. All right. Powers.
What of the seven powers does Google
have? And for new listeners to the show,
this is based on a book called Seven
Powers by Hamilton Helmer. And it is the
seven factors that enable a business to
achieve persistent differential returns
or basically how to be way more
profitable than your closest competitor
sustainably. And the seven are
counterpositioning, scale economies,
switching costs, network economies,
process power, branding, and cornered
resource. Let's see. To start, I guess
let's just go down the list. I actually
don't think there was tremendous
counterpositioning here. You could argue
versus Yahoo. Well, it's interesting
because it was a new industry. They were
counterpositioned against the other
search engines that existed at the time
in that they as we talked about with
Excite when they were trying to sell
back rub to Excite. The other search
engines wanted you to stay on the page
and Google didn't. But I don't think
that really counts because it was a new
industry and those were bit players.
There was no incumbent already there,
right? And Google was just better. Being
better is not counterpositioning. The
best argument for counterpositioning is
versus the portals. Yeah. Versus Yahoo.
It may have become clear at some point
that search actually is important, but
the portals couldn't really pivot to it
because they couldn't give up all of
their portal ad revenues. Yeah, I think
that's also right. And also take Yahoo.
Yahoo had constructed itself as a media
company even though it was started by
two electrical engineering PhDs from
Stanford, right? And just couldn't
pivot. I mean famously it tried to right
it bought Overture then it bought
Inktomy and then they spent years trying
to put Overture and Inctomy together to
create a packaged competitor to Google.
This was the ill- fated project Panama
at Yahoo which by the way acquired
Easter egg that is where Yan Kum and
Brian Acton met at Yahoo and then they
would get so frustrated and leave and
start WhatsApp. But yeah, I think
there's counter positioning against
Yahoo there. Okay, scale economies for
sure. There's more powers here too, but
the whole thing is scale economies. And
it's more than just the traditional one.
I mean, think about Hamilton's
traditional definition here is that
Netflix has scale economies because it
can amortize the cost of buying a given
piece of content across more users. This
is more than that. I mean this is for a
given piece of infrastructure or
software or hardware investment that
Google wants to make or a user
acquisition cost right they can amortize
that across more users but also as they
scale they make more revenue per user
right I don't know what that is is that
a new power supercale economies yeah
where does this come from auctionbased
businesses whenever you have auctions to
determine pricing.
The more liquidity you have, the higher
price is. And so, are there other
businesses that we can kind of look at
that are similar? Do scale economies
ever explain why scale gets you more
revenue? What is the thing where with an
increase in scale, their prices go up?
They maximize their available take on
any given micro auction. This is weird.
I'm trying to think in another
auction-based world like Christy's would
kind of have this or Sabes as you get
more and more people into the auction
house audience any given sale is likely
to go at a higher value. A real estate
brokerage if people were actually like
loyal clients of a real estate
brokerage. Oh, is this just network
economies that the more queries you
have, the more advertisers you'll have,
the more advertisers you'll have, the
more But typically network economies are
when people join the network, it creates
value for other people in the network.
That is true from a advertiser to a
searcher and a searcher to an
advertiser. So, we should say this
definitely has network economies. It's
almost like there's negative network
economies from advertiser to advertiser.
You don't want your competitors to be on
the platform, but Google does. Yeah,
maybe you're right. Maybe there's
something unique to auction models here
because the price is dynamic. Hamilton,
if you're listening, we need to talk.
Yeah,
great. Okay, let's keep going. Yep.
Switching costs? Not yet. Not yet. Talk
about that in the next episode. When
you're not logged in and there's no
personalization, no real switching costs
yet. Yep. And everything else you'd
switch to is worse, honestly. Branding.
Yeah, to a certain extent. Absolutely.
They built a brand of trust and speed
and and fun. I had a Google shirt. I
used to read Google blogs. I mean, I'm
trying to think, let me date the year.
to six. I was as big a Google fan of
things that were googly as I was an
Apple fan for that period of my time.
And I think a lot of people were. I
think for those of us who weren't in
Silicon Valley, that's what it meant to
be successful at Silicon Valley was to
become Google. Yeah, I would agree with
that too. I think it's weak branding
power though because that's not a
branding power like Hermes has branding
power. It's gone away over time. Now
it's just a and for the literal
definition, are people willing to pay
more for the brand? Like are advertisers
willing to spend more on Google than
elsewhere? No, they're rational actors.
They had an employment brand though. To
your point, they absolutely had an
employment brand. Smart people would be
willing to do anything to work at
Google. Yep. And lastly, cornered
resource. Not really at this point in
time. Not really. And process power. I
also don't think there's much there.
Yeah, I don't think so. Okay.
Quintessence, we already talked about
yours. Do you want to say another word
on it? No, the increasing returns to
scale, the revenue side is unbelievable.
And the fact that they can have that
insight and then realize they need to go
be super aggressive on spending. It
makes total sense if you have a long
view and think our RPOS are only going
to grow up. People are going to be
sticky forever. It is worth investing
heavily to win this race. It's amazing.
Yes, I love your quintessence. It's
totally right. I will second and
underline it. One not quite as good but
alternative quintessence I want to put
out there about Google is a quote from a
page in Steven Levy's book in the Plex.
On June 8th, 2007, Justin Rosenstein,
who until recently had been a Google
product manager, sent an email to his
colleagues. I am writing to spread good
news. The missive said, Facebook really
is that company. Which company? That
one. The company that shows up once in a
very long while. The Google of
yesterday. The Microsoft of long ago.
That company that's on the cusp of
changing the world. that's still small
enough where each employee has a huge
impact on the organization where you
know you'll kick yourself in three years
if you don't jump on the bandwagon now
even after someone had told you it was
rolling toward the promised land that
was Google was that company Microsoft
was the first that company Google was
that company and then Facebook was that
company that's exactly right and they
are exceedingly exceedingly rare yes
they They are. So, that about captures
it. That's my quintessence. Google was
that company. All right. Carveouts.
Carveouts. I have a three-way tie of
three excellent TV shows that I watched
in the last I guess two months because
we didn't do uh Carvouts with Steve
Bulmer. Great. The first and I think the
most landmark of mine is the rehearsal
with Nathan Fielder. Season two. Oh my
god. I don't want to spoil anything for
anyone. So, if you're a person who
believes that anything is spoilers,
stop. I'll tell you things that you'll
learn in the first 10 minutes of the
first episode. Nathan, just to give you
some quick background, a decade ago did
a show called Nathan for You went and
helped small business owners figure out
how to make their businesses better,
improve on a key area. But it's all kind
of satirical. the way that he helps them
accomplish their goals is very bad for
their business in in most other
respects. He's an incredible comedian
and really dry sense of humor. And the
thing that he did in Nathan for you was
like a pretty good commitment to the
bit. The lengths that he would go to,
for example, to get a coffee shop owner
to get more traffic in their store, they
rebranded the store to dumb Starbucks.
and he spent hundreds of thousands of
dollars of the studios money or maybe
millions of dollars to commit to this
rebrand. Obviously a bad idea, but great
TV. In the rehearsal, he commits to the
bit so unbelievably hard it takes years
of his life. And he has a a goal to
reduce the number of plane crashes by
doing a deep study of the thing that
causes plane crashes, which he believes
to be pilot communication.
And in this season of the rehearsal, he
builds elaborate elaborate sets and
hires a bunch of actors to simulate
different experiences to help these
pilots feel more comfortable
communicating with each other so that
fewer planes will crash. And I am
telling you, David, this is the tip of
the iceberg. It gets crazy.
Sounds amazing. Commitment to the bit at
an all-time great. Are we committed to
the bit? We are. We're nowhere near as
committed to the bit as Nathan is. It
doesn't It sounds like we're not. Yeah,
it's inspiring. Okay, so that's one. Two
is a much more casual, very enjoyable
show called Your Friends and Neighbors
on Apple TV. It's John Ham. It's
beautifully shot. It's a little bit like
the, you know, following rich people
around like Succession is these sort of
fictional characters, but with an
unexpected twist. Love your friends and
neighbors on Apple TV. And then Andor
season 2. on Disney was excellent.
Starts a little slow. First three, four
episodes are not as good as season one
in my opinion, but the last eight
episodes are like some of the best Star
Wars canon that exists. I love it. Ben,
you are my in addition to being my best
friend, you are also my smart friend who
has like great TV recommendations. So, I
love that you get to be that smart, you
know, TV recommener friend for the
internet, too. I'm here for you and I
will continue dumping this on you even
though I know you don't watch TV. You'll
never get like to this is for listeners.
This isn't for you. Two little kids.
Tough. Tough.
My carve outs. I've got two. Well, I've
got one standard carve out. Gamecraft
season 3. Gamecraft podcast. We did a
crossover with Mitch and Blake years
ago. They have really committed to the
bit. Season 3 is excellent. I'm so glad
they've kept up the podcast. It's really
great. If you like gaming, the gaming
industry, Mitch and Blake are two of the
best in the business. My next carveout
related to that is actually sort of a
real- time dilemma carveout. And this is
good because it could be a multi-part
series here on Google. I'll report back
in the next episode which direction I
went with this carveout. So, as I said
before, I think I did a preemptive
carvout. I was so excited for Switch 2.
Switch 2 finally launched. I haven't
gotten one yet. I have a reservation for
a shopping appointment at the Nintendo
store in San Francisco. the new Nintendo
store here in San Francisco. Super
excited. I can't wait for it. I can't
wait to play it with my daughters
someday as they're approaching that age.
All right. What's the decision? As I was
watching reviews on YouTube, I started
getting into Steam Deck content. And now
I'm desperately conflicted.
Do I want to get the Switch 2 like I'd
been planning or do I want to go in a
totally different direction and get a
Steam Deck? M
well acquiring listeners, tune in. If
you weren't interested in Google part
two on its own merits, now you're going
to be on pins and needles from I would
ask our listener base for help with this
decision and I would love all of your
thoughts, but because of our editing
process, the reality is I will have made
my decision already by the time this
episode goes live. So, tweet a picture
listeners. I'll tweet a picture. Yes.
Yes. Yes. All right, that's what I got.
Awesome. Well, listeners, we would love
to see you in New York City.
Acquired.fm/nyc
if you want to come and be a part of the
ridiculous acquired experience we are
planning at Radio City Music Hall with
our good friends at JP Morgan Payments.
Speaking of JP Morgan Payments, thank
you to our partners this season. JP
Morgan Payments offers trusted, reliable
payments infrastructure for your
business, no matter the scale. to
Anthropic, the makers of Claude, an
excellent AI assistant that I used a ton
in prepping for this episode. Me, too. I
mean, it is transforming the way
acquired works, which is just awesome.
To statig, the best way to do
experimentation and more as a product
development team and Verscell, your
complete platform for web development.
We've got some thank yous. We talked to
a zillion people as seems to be the new
president when we do these large tech
companies. One off the top, Arvin
Navaratnam for Worldly Partners did an
awesome write up on uh the company as
usual, which he will make available by
clicking the link in the show notes. And
then David, you've been maintaining the
list. Yes, I've been maintaining the
list of some of the folks we should
thank for helping us with this episode.
In addition to the many other folks we
talked to who we can't mention, but
thank you. You know who you are. But
specifically, thank you to Craig
Silverstein, Google's first employee, to
Anna Patterson, to Omid Cordistani, Alan
Eustace, Clay Bavor, Brett Taylor, Jeff
Dean, Jen Fitzpatrick, Danny Sullivan,
Nick Fox, and to Paul Bukite, to Bill
Gross, to Wesley Chan, and to Esar
Lipkovitz. Thank you so much for the
conversations. David, I feel like we got
a dream team of people if we want to go
start a tech company. Yeah. Allstar
lineup. I started joking by the end of
the research process. I was like, I
think we are sapping billions of dollars
of market cap out of the economy by
taking people's time to have these
conversations. So, we greatly appreciate
it. Yep. All right, listeners. We'll see
you next time. We'll see you next time.
Who got the truth?
Is it you? Is it you? Is it you? Who got
the truth now? Huh?
[Music]